Ambitions for Scotland
Fulfilling Britain's great potential The Prime Minister sets out his vision for Britain's future Building a better Scotland by Helen Liddell, Secretary of State for Scotland, and Henry McLeish, First Minister 1. Prosperity for all How we expand our economy and raise our living standards 2. World-class public services How investment and reform will improve public services 3. A modern welfare state How we help people into work and provide security for those who can't work 4. Strong and safe communities How we tackle crime and renew our society 5. Britain strong in the world How we make foreign policy work for Britain and the wider world The choices for Scotland A lot done, a lot to do, and a lot to lose 25 steps to a better Scotland Our key steps for a second term The contract delivered How Labour has fulfilled its first-term promises 2 7


This election is in many ways even more important than the last. Since May 1997 we have laid the foundations of a Britain whose economy is stronger, where investment is now pouring into public services, where social division is being slowly healed and where influence abroad is being regained.

interests and social division, complacency bred by harking But these are only the foundations of larger change. Now is back to the past. We achieved spurts of economic growth, the chance to build the future properly, to make the second but inflation would then get out of control. Our welfare state term the basis for a radical programme of British renewal: to was founded to offer security, but its progress was stalled. keep a firm grip on inflation, with low interest rates and the We reached out to Europe, then drew back to become semipublic finances sound, and then build the dynamic and productive economy of the future; to keep investment coming detached. It is as if a glass ceiling stopped us fulfilling our potential. into public services and then make the reforms so we use the In the 21st century we have the opportunity to break money well; to refashion the welfare state on the basis of through the glass ceiling, because our historic strengths rights and responsibilities, with people helped to help themselves, not just given handouts; to ensure all families are match the demands of the modern world. We can use our openness and entrepreneurial flair to safe in their communities by tackling crime and its causes; become a global centre in the knowledge economy. We can and to give Britain back its leadership role in the world. use our sense of fair play and mutual responsibility to be a We need the second term to do it. That is the choice: to strong, dynamic, multiracial society held together by strong make progress or to dismantle the foundations laid. And with values. We can use our historic and geographical position the state of today's Conservatives, the choice is stark. This choice will decide whether more people will be able to to link Europe and America and help the developing world. The key to tapping our strengths, to breaking through the realise their aspirations for themselves and their children ­ glass ceiling, is contained in a simple idea that is hard to to be able to rely on a stable economy where hard work is achieve, set out at the heart of our constitution as a party: rewarded by rising living standards, to receive world-class the determination to put power, wealth and opportunity in education and healthcare, to enjoy a dignified old age, to feel safe and secure in a strong community, and to be proud the hands of the many, not the few. I know as well as anyone that we have just begun; millions to be British. Or whether we will be held back by the of hard-working families want, need and deserve more. That traditional British malaise of restricting life's great oppor tunities and blessings to a minority. There is much still means more change in a second term, not less, to extend oppor tunity for all. We reject the quiet life. We must secure a to be done, but we have come a long way in four years. mandate for change. Britain stands more prosperous, more equal, more respected. Our country is on a new course. My passion is to continue the modernisation of Britain, in Ten goals for 2010 favour of hard-working families, so that all our children, wherever they live, whatever their background, have an · Long-term economic stability equal chance to benefit from the opportunities our country · Rising living standards for all has to offer and to share in its wealth. · Expanded higher education and higher school standards · A healthier nation with fast treatment, free at the point The challenge for Britain of use I am honoured to be Prime Minister. And I have a confident · Full employment belief in our country. We are not boastful. But we have real · Oppor tunity for all children, security for all pensioners strengths. Great people. Strong values. Proud history. · A modern criminal justice system The British people achieved magnificent things in the · Strong and accountable government 20th century. But for too long, our strengths have been · British ideas leading a reformed and enlarged Europe undermined by weaknesses of elitism and snobbery, vested · Global poverty and climate change tackled.

2

Fulfilling Britain's great potential

3


4

Shifting the odds for hard-working families In 1997 we promised a start, not a revolution. We made five specific five-year pledges. Three have been completed early; all will be completed within five years, as promised. Our pledge that Scotland should have its first Parliament in 300 years has been met and Britain is stronger as a result. Each pledge is matched by further achievement: the lowest inflation and unemployment for a generation, one million new jobs, 100,000 extra operations in the NHS in Scotland, the best primary school test results ever and, as the Scottish Crime Survey shows, crime is at its lowest level for 20 years. We also offered a ten-point contract to the British people. The results are at the back of this manifesto. Not everything has gone right ­ it never does. But we are getting there, easing burdens and extending opportunities ­ by choice, not chance. Economic instability wrecks the lives of hard-working families. So we chose to put the public finances right. It meant tough decisions, opposed by the Conservatives. But today the economy is stable and growing, and interest rates are nearly half the level they averaged under the Conser vatives. Unemployment steals dignity. So we chose to introduce a windfall tax on the excess profits of the privatised utilities, to help unemployed people back to work. That was opposed by the Conservatives, who are now pledged to abolish the New Deal. But today, youth unemployment is at its lowest level since 1975 and long-term unemployment at its lowest level since 1978. Poor education is a cruel injustice. So we chose to focus on standards in our schools. And today, primary schools are achieving better results than ever before. A run-down health service causes insecurity. So we chose to reform the NHS and inject new money. Waiting lists and times are now falling, and the number of nurses and doctors is now rising. Pover ty denies basic rights. So we chose to reform the welfare state to channel extra money to the poorest pensioners and poorest children. Today single pensioners can look forward to a minimum income of £100 a week, £154 for pensioner couples, and over one million children have been taken out of poverty, 100,000 of them in Scotland. The centralisation of power only helps the powerful. So we chose to break the suffocating centralisation of British government. The UK has been strengthened. Today it is the Conser vatives who threaten the stability of the UK with their proposals for two classes of MP. This manifesto sets out our vision for continued par tnership between Labour at Westminster and Labour in the Scottish Parliament. It sets out the future plans for modernisation of Scotland's public services that have already been set in train by Labour in the Scottish Parliament. It is the job of the Labour-led Scottish Executive

in the Scottish Parliament to deliver the necessary improvements to public services in Scotland. The task of a Labour government is to deliver the investment needed to make that change happen. Isolation from Europe does not help anyone. So we chose to engage constructively in Europe, not shout abuse from the sidelines. Today Europe is moving in a direction that is good for Britain and good for Europe. In policy for aid, development and international debt relief, we have led the way. Of course, there are still big problems, but we are better of f, better educated, better governed, better respected abroad. There has been another change too. A change of priorities and values. We learnt in the 1980s that looking

Better primary school results than ever before... now we focus on secondary schools

after number one was not enough; that without opportunity, responsibility was weak; and that an unfair society was a less prosperous one. The philosophy was wrong; it hurt millions of families and it left our country with lasting problems. We have shown we are a reformed party, competent to govern. Now we offer more. More change and more rewards for Britain's hard-working families: more prosperity, more oppor tunities, more security. Ambitions for Britain Stretching the family budget; finding time for children as well as work; holding on to mutual respect; staying healthy when there can be hazards even in the air we breathe. These are daily worries that confront people. They are my concerns too. But, while there is always a market for people who say we are doomed, that all new ideas are bad ideas even as things improve, that we might as well curl up with our prejudices and shut the door on the world, I am an optimist. New Labour is ambitious for Britain's future and is ready to lead. First, we will sustain economic stability and build deeper prosperity that reaches every region of the country. Skills, infrastructure, the technological revolution ­ all are vital to raise British living standards faster. We will put as much

energy into helping the adults without basic skills as we did in tackling long-term unemployment through the New Deal. Second, we seek to achieve a renaissance of status and quality for public services and their staff ­ above all, in our goals for education and health. We will continue to raise standards in our schools; we will invest new resources, and suppor t doctors and nurses to transform health services; we will seek to extend the very best in culture and sport to all. Third, we seek to modernise the welfare state. The benefits system will be restructured around work; support for children and families through the tax and benefits system will be transformed; cash and services for pensioners will be radically improved. Four th, we will strengthen our communities, above all, by continuing to cut crime. We will tackle head on Scotland's drug dealers. And because we know that without tackling the causes of crime we will never tackle crime, we will strengthen and empower local communities. Fifth, we will turn our inner confidence to strength abroad, in Europe and beyond, to tackle global problems ­ above all, environmental degradation and the shame of global pover ty. We will engage fully in Europe, help enlarge the European Union and make it more effective, and insist that the British people will have the final say on any proposal to join the Euro. These ambitions are summarised in our ten goals for 2010. They will never be achieved by government alone. We know it is the people who ultimately change the country. Our partnership with the voluntary sector has steadily strengthened since 1997, as we learn from its diversity. We work with the private sector, drawing on its vitality. Countries only prosper on the basis of partnership ­ between government, employers and their employees, and the voluntary sector. An active, enabling state, not a nanny state ­ doing things with people, not to them ­ is what Britain needs. So, while the Conservatives will spend most of this election telling you what their government cannot do, this manifesto sets out what our government can do. We know the power and value of markets, but we also know their limits. Now is the time to renew our civic and social institutions to deliver better education, health, safety, transpor t and a better environment. Fighting for values, not just for election victory The Conservatives always look back. In economic policy they promise to repeat the mistakes of the 1980s ­ unaf fordable tax cuts and spending cuts followed by ballooning deficits, rising interest rates and the old cycle of boom and bust. In social policy their renewed commitment to cuts and privatisation, and to withdrawing the support helping to heal social division, is just a throwback to the 1980s. In foreign policy they risk not just isolation but exit from the EU. Jobs, trade and investment depend on our membership

Fulfilling Britain's great potential

Fulfilling Britain's great potential

Reforming the welfare state... Labour is committed to building strong communities

of the European Union. The Conservative policy of opposing the enlargement of Europe in the Nice Treaty and their pledge to renegotiate the terms of Britain's EU membership is dangerous and ill thought-out. Standing up for Britain means fighting for Britain's interests in Europe, not leaving Europe, which threatens our national interest. All that we have achieved would be put at risk not just by the Conservatives but by those who would help them in by the back door. A vote for the Nationalists can only help the Tories. On 8 June, Britain will either wake up to a Labour government or a Conservative government. So the choice we face today is starker than in 1997. The Conser vatives have swung further to the right. And in government, Labour's agenda has become increasingly bold and ambitious. For many years the Conservatives claimed to offer economic strength. Labour dominated social issues. Many people found their head telling them to vote Tory, and their hear t telling them to vote Labour. Today, head and heart are coming together. New Labour is proving that it is only by using the talents of all that we get a healthy economy; and that only by giving a stake to all are we a healthy society. We have made our choice: stability, not boom and bust; investment, not cuts; engagement, not isolationism; the many, not the few. A lot done and a lot more to do with New Labour; or a lot for you to lose under the Conservatives. I deeply believe that for Britain the best is still to come. So I ask you to continue on this journey with us. Together we can achieve so much more.

Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party

5


Building a better Scotland
Labour has been good for Scotland. At the last general election, we said things would get better ­ and they have. We have already achieved a lot. But we know we have much more to do and that there are still challenges to meet before we create the Scotland we all want to see. The future Scotland deserves.
Wage and the Working Families Tax Credit have brought help to the poorest in our communities. Higher pensions and better benefits have begun to repay the debt we all owe to the older generation. In 21st-century Scotland we will not tolerate child or pensioner poverty. Our goal is to end child poverty in a generation and to ensure that by 2003 no single pensioner will have an income below £100 a week and no pensioner couple below £154. We are working together for safer communities. Drugrelated crime wrecks lives and damages communities ­ but it cannot be tackled in isolation. The drugs menace is not just a Scottish problem ­ it is also a British one. That is why Labour at Westminster has made the money available to fund a £100 million package of measures on drugs education, treatment and rehabilitation. And why we will ensure both parliaments work together to seize the assets of drug dealers. Labour's investment in public services must not be jeopardised. But while Labour is committed to record investment in public services in Scotland, the Tories' £16 billion worth of cuts would axe the money available for Scotland's schools and hospitals. The Tories threaten ever ything Labour has worked to achieve ­ including the National Minimum Wage, new employment rights, the New Deal and the free TV licences for over-75s. Scotland has rejected the single issue politics of the SNP that fails to recognise that it is poverty that scars Scotland, not the border with England. For the first time in a generation, this election is not about the constitution. It is a straight choice ­ Labour or Tory. We have just begun to build the new Scotland. We ask for a second term to complete our unfinished business ­ together.

We said that after nearly two decades of Tory government it would take at least two terms of Labour government to build a better Britain and a better Scotland. Scotland knows better than most parts of the United Kingdom the legacy the Labour government inherited. Scottish industries had been destroyed and jobs lost for ever, but the deeper damage was to Scotland's confidence and sense of community. The Labour government's first task was to reverse that damage. Now, we have rising living standards. More people in work. Fewer in poverty. Falling crime. Record investment in our public services. New schools. New hospitals. And after 300 years we now have again a Scottish Parliament, returning power to the people of Scotland within the United Kingdom. We are stronger together than we are apart. We are proud to be both Scottish and British. Britain's ability to remain united, while allowing its peoples to be diverse and proud of it, is a source of strength. This election is about how we create 21st century Scotland. And we need a partnership of Labour at both Westminster and Holyrood to do it. Scotland needs a Labour government to maintain a stable economy, better pensions, reform of the tax and benefit system, welfare to work, foreign and defence policy, international development, and so on. Scotland gains when Britain prospers. Our ambitions go far beyond what has been achieved. The people of Scotland are benefiting from the economic stability created by Labour's prudent management of the economy. Labour has focused on keeping mortgage rates, inflation and unemployment low. The National Minimum

Helen Liddell, Secretary of State for Scotland and Henry McLeish, First Minister

7


1
Our ten-year goals Fiscal rules consistently met, low inflation, and interest rates as low as possible, as we deliver long-term economic stability. Faster productivity growth than our main competitors as we achieve rising living standards for all. Our next steps
· Basic skills for 750,000 people · Innovative financing schemes to

Prosperity for all
Labour's purpose is to help every family, not just a few, to raise their living standards and plan ahead with security. We have a ten-year vision: higher living standards, affordable mortgages and fairer taxes combined with much greater investment in vital public services. Economic stability is the foundation. We know the price of boom and bust; it was paid in the 1980s and 1990s by millions of hard-working families. Our reforms since 1997 have helped cut interest rates to nearly half of what they averaged under the Conservatives, saving mortgage payers on average £1,200 a year. By 2010, we want Britain to break from decades of boom and bust, as we stick to clear rules for spending and borrowing. We will take no risks with economic policy, make no compromise on fiscal responsibility. Stability comes first. But stability is not enough. We need to produce more, better, and to higher value, to raise our earning power and to meet our ten-year goal of faster productivity growth than our main competitors. We must make Britain the best place to do business in Europe ­ a dynamic economy, founded on skills and knowledge, developing the talent of all our people, and contributing to sustainable development. That means investment by private and public sectors in infrastructure and skills, and the right competitive framework to support enterprise, small and large, manufacturing and services. Every extra trained, employed worker contributes to a fairer society, as well as a more prosperous one; with social failure, from school drop-outs to crime, comes economic failure. Fairness and enterprise go together. It is up to government to do everything it can to help ensure that no individual and no community is left behind.
Labour's vision for all families: higher wages, affordable mortgages, fairer taxes and better public services

encourage investment
· Free off-peak bus travel for pensioners

and people with disabilities
· Raise the minimum wage to £4.20 · £1,000 tax cut ­ the Children's

Tax Credit ­ for parents of new-born children

8


The fundamentals
Better off with Labour

The foundation of opportunity and prosperity is economic stability. We know the risks of promises that cannot be paid for: the Conservatives led Britain into two deep recessions, double-digit inflation, record unemployment, 15 per cent interest rates and a doubling of the national debt. Choice, not chance, has turned things round. Independence for the Bank of England and longterm fiscal rules have given the UK the most stable and transparent economic framework in Europe. Britain now has the best combination of low interest rates, low inflation and low unemployment since the 1960s. We are saving nearly £9 billion this year on debt and unemployment, so 84p of every extra pound of public spending goes on national priorities, compared to 58p under the Conservatives. So we will pursue a balanced approach on the economy with stability the foundation, more investment not less, and as affordable, targeted tax cuts on our priorities. Our aim is to put more wealth in the hands of more people. That is why we will keep mortgage rates as low as possible, ensure competition

inflation target is 2.5 per cent. We will continue to meet our fiscal rules: over the economic cycle we will borrow only to invest and keep net debt at a stable and prudent level. We are pledged for the next three years to raise health and education spending to record levels. Labour will substantially boost net public investment. Tax policy will be governed by the health of the public finances, the requirement for public investment, and the needs of families, business and the environment. We have rewarded work through the new 10p star ting rate of tax and the Working Families Tax Credit. The basic rate of tax has been cut to 22p. We will support families through the new Children's Tax Credit, set at up to £1,000 a year for new parents ­ the first recognition of the costs of children in the tax system for 20 years. On average, UK households have benefited by £590 a year from personal tax and benefit measures introduced since 1997. Living standards have risen by 10 per cent over the Parliament for a single earner family on average earnings. To help those who work and save, we will extend the 10p tax band. We will continue to tackle tax avoidance. We will not raise the basic or top rates

Britain, bitterly opposed at every stage by the Conser vatives, has been a success of our first term. It fulfils, after 100 years, a founding ambition of the Labour Party. Around 120,000 Scots have been helped, the majority of them women; jobs have not been lost. The Low Pay Commission, which we will make permanent, has made clear recommendations for the future. New Labour will raise the minimum wage to £4.10 this October, and we are committed to raising it, subject to economic conditions, to £4.20 in October 2002.
Labour rewards saving Nine million people invested in Individual Savings Accounts (ISAs) in their first year. To encourage more saving, we will maintain the £7,000 contribution limit for the next Parliament. We will also help pensioners: the Pension Credit will match private saving with government funds, and pensioners will no longer be penalised for their thrift. (See `A moder n welfare state'). To boost the savings habit, we will create a new Savings Gateway for people on lower incomes where their savings will be matched by the government.

The productivity challenge
Staying better off

To raise living standards, our ambition is to raise our productivity faster than our competitors, and ensure our goods and services are competitive in world markets. Labour has four priorities.
1. Investment in skills and innovation Skills We are passionate about giving every child the chance of a decent education. But we are equally determined to offer learning opportunities to adults. Our ambition is for everyone to have the oppor tunity to train, in a partnership of employers, employees and government, each giving time and/or money to raise standards of skills in the UK. More security and support for families with Labour: lower household bills, smaller mortgages and tax and benefit reform to help children Our first priority is to help the seven million adults estimated to lack basic literacy and keeps down household bills, support savings of income tax in the next Parliament. We renew numeracy, with 750,000 people achieving and share ownership, and create a new Child our pledge not to extend VAT to food, children's basic skill levels by 2004. We will: Trust Fund for every child at birth to invest for clothes, books, newspapers and public · ensure that jobseekers get the benefit of a when they reach adulthood. transpor t fares. basic skills test, as well as incentives and There are no guarantees in an integrated world obligations to take courses to tackle literacy economy. But we showed during the Asian and/or numeracy problems Labour rewards work economic crisis how to steer a course of stability Labour believes that if you work hard you should · extend Individual Learning Accounts in turbulent times. We will continue to work at be able to support a family. We will guarantee a · tackle the financial barriers that prevent adults international level to minimise global economic minimum family income of £225 for a 35-hour studying in further education. turbulence and to protect Britain if it occurs. week; in the next Parliament an Employment Basic skills are the start; updating skills is Tax Credit will reward the work of people on low something for all of us. Further education incomes, whether or not they have children colleges have a critical role to play in the future. Tax and spending (see `A modern welfare state'). The world-first University for Industry now Fiscal responsibility and monetary stability are The first-ever National Minimum Wage for operates under the brand of learndirectscotland, the foundation of our future plans. New Labour's

of fering 45,000 learning opportunities. The University of the Highlands and Islands is also now up and running. We need a step-change in workplace learning ­ particularly in small and medium-sized firms. We are determined to develop a three-way par tnership to bring this about. Current arrangements have secured increased par ticipation, but not enough. Unions and employers have a key role but we also need to motivate individual employees. Where both sides of industry in a sector agree, we will help set up a statutory framework for training. We will boost the efforts of trade unions to raise skill levels by giving statutory backing to union learning representatives, and support the Scottish Trade Union Learning Fund. Government has a wide-ranging role to play, and is seeking to develop a training tax credit. Innovation Science and technology is the basis of new products and industries, both vital to productivity growth. Since 1997 extra investment of £1.5 billion over three years has given science a fresh star t, and a new stream of university funding has helped create new links between scientific breakthroughs and new products. But we need to invest more to be at the cutting edge of science ­ in biotechnology and genome research. We propose an R&D tax credit to promote business investment in research. We will work for a European patent system by the end of this year to simplify the process of bringing ideas to market. The £235 billion a year, and growing, global market for green technology gives real opportunity to British industr y to benefit from a shift to low-carbon technologies. We will continue to encourage the best scientists to work in the UK, as well as making the most of our science base in universities (see `World-class public services').
2. Supporting British business Government cannot make a business successful. But government must create the right framework to help business achieve healthy long-term growth. Since 1997 corporation tax rates have been cut to their lowest levels ever. Companies no longer face a perverse incentive to pay out dividends rather than invest for the future. Reform of capital gains tax has given the entrepreneur or investor new incentives for investment. We will support vital investment through the tax system, with allowances for high tech as well as small business investment. The Myners repor t has identified weaknesses in our venture capital market, undermining long-term investment and economic dynamism. We will act on its recommendations, including the abolition of the Minimum Funding Requirement and reforms to pension fund management, and

review progress in two years. When people have worked hard, they want their money to go as far as possible. Competition policy has already helped cut cash-machine charges and new car prices. We will extend our fair and robust competition regime by giving more independence to the competition authorities. We will toughen the laws on rogue traders, unfair terms in contracts, and loan sharks. In the labour market, minimum standards for people at work offer dignity and self-esteem. Regulation should be introduced, where it is necessar y, in a light-touch way. We will cut back the red tape associated with regulation, examine opportunities to put time limits on regulations, deregulate by secondary legislation, and offer help to small firms. Over 150,000 small businesses have been set up in the UK since 1997. We are committed to reform the tax treatment of small business, including VAT, and to seek to reduce payroll burdens. Small business will also benefit from extending the 10p tax band. We will reform the bankruptcy laws to ensure second chances for people who go bankrupt through no fault of their

10

individuals: universal access is vital to effective markets. We will put all government services online by 2005, to improve access to services and spur business on-line. We will work to ensure that broadband, which allows fast internet access, is accessible across Scotland. English is the language of the internet. We have the best TV in the world. The next challenge is to open up the opportunities of learning and enjoyment offered by digital TV and the internet to every household. We are committed to making the switchover from analogue to digital signals as soon as conditions for access and cost have been met. The governance of this fast-changing industry is out of date. We will merge the five separate regulators into one, to create the world's most competitive and advanced regulatory system. We believe in the value and necessity of public ser vice broadcasting, and have committed to major funding increases for the BBC, and to suppor ting a publicly-owned Channel 4. Ofcom will ensure a level playing field, benefiting consumers in terms of choice, price and quality, in particular through promoting competition. Transport A strong economy needs good transport. Yet our inheritance was massive under-investment, with British Rail broken into over 100 privatised pieces and bus services in decline. Labour's priority is to improve and expand railway and road travel. Thanks to Labour's successful management of the economy at a UK level, Labour in the Scottish Parliament is now able to make record investment in transport. In Scotland, transport spending will increase by 45 per cent over the next three years. This investment and modernisation would be put at risk by a return to Conser vative boom and bust and by £16 billion wor th of Tory cuts to our public services. We are committed to delivering an efficient, Labour supports fairness at work safe transport system that meets the needs of own and provide funds for new start-ups. all of society across Scotland ­ without We will modernise company law to promote threatening our environment. transparency, reduce burdens on small Already, the benefits of Labour investment business and promote long-term economic and Labour partnership are beginning to show success. We welcome the recommendations through. There are more train and bus links, of the Co-operative Commission, which also new resources for Scotland's rural communities, covered the significant mutual sector, and will more park-and-ride schemes, and better examine them with a view to strengthening transpor t information. these important parts of our economy. In Scotland, since Labour was elected in 1997, we have delivered £90 million through our Public Transpor t Fund, and have already supported 52 3. Modernising our infrastructure for the projects throughout Scotland. information age We are also committed to investing a further Digital nation £150 million in the Public Transport Fund by The infrastructure of the future includes fast, 2003-04. And we will deliver readily accessible ef ficient and affordable communication ­ and accurate information for transport users telecommunications, the internet and broadthrough the Transport Direct initiative. casting. That requires the best competitive environment, effective regulation, and continued · Rail: Across the UK, passenger numbers have risen by 17 per cent since 1997 and freight has public and private investment in the technologies increased by 22 per cent. But recent crises have of the future. proven the need for urgent investment and strong A `digital divide' would hurt business as well as

Prosperity for all

Prosperity for all 11


12

regulation. With Labour, £60 billion will be spent on upgrading the rail network, with the majority of rolling stock replaced. Around 500 new carriages are already in use, another 3,000 ordered. We plan to expand capacity to boost passenger levels by 50 per cent and freight by more. Our partnership with the Scottish Parliament of fers a bigger, better, safer rail network. Here in Scotland over £30 million allocated from the Scottish Executive's Public Transport Fund has been awarded to rail projects in Scotland. Our target of 18 million lorry-miles off the roads by 2002 is well on target and we have awarded £19.5 million of freight facilities grants. Safer train protection systems are now being installed and will be extended following Lord Cullen's repor t into rail safety. The Strategic Rail Authority (SRA) has been set up to provide strong, strategic direction. Train companies will get longer franchises in return for higher investment and improved ser vices. The SRA will lead the expansion of the network, using public-private partnerships (PPPs). Railtrack is being reformed to focus on the operation of existing track and signalling. The Rail Regulator, with strengthened powers, will ensure the delivery of higher standards, increased safety and increased investment by the company. · Roads: Our roads need investment to relieve Take the bus... free off-peak bus travel from October 2002 for pensioners and people with disabilities congestion, tackle disrepair and improve Islands in 2000-01 was at record levels, highway communications technology. We are safety. Labour in the Scottish Executive is including £14 million for Highlands and Islands also working with the motor industry to develop now able to tackle the years of Conservative Airpor ts Ltd and £19.8 million for Caledonian safer and more fuel-efficient vehicles. under-investment in our roads to provide a MacBrayne. Investment in new ferries and We will continue our efforts to double cycle modern strategic network for Scotland's airpor t facilities is under way. use between 1996 and 2002 and to double it drivers and businesses by increasing annual We are committed to securing the future of again by 2012. We will work to cut congestion investment from £180 million to £250 million our lifeline ferry service network. Services to caused by the `school run' and have invested by 2003-04. the Highlands and Islands must be modern, £5.2 million for Safer Routes to School. Buses are vital to local journeys. Our reliable and safe, at affordable fares, but We have given local authorities the freedom investment in bus travel through the Scottish also compatible with European competition to choose to use charges to reduce traffic ­ but Parliament has led to the first rise in bus law. Caledonian MacBrayne will remain in we insist they put the money into better travel in 13 years. Bus partnerships between public ownership. transpor t services. local authorities and private bus companies International links are also vital. Plans for · Rural services: Our Rural Transport Fund has will improve passenger numbers and aviation and airports over the next 30 years will provided 85 new or enhanced rural services in service quality. be produced next year. We remain committed Scotland since the scheme was launched in Labour is also committed to promoting to a new Scottish Air Traffic Control Centre at 1998. We will invest £18 million in rural simple, flexible ticketing systems and clear, transpor t schemes for the next three years. The Prestwick. Merchant ships are returning to the reliable, accessible passenger information. British flag. We will complete the high-speed Highlands and Islands will particularly benefit, We have introduced free travel on bus, rail and Channel Tunnel rail link. with £6 million being allocated to local ferr y services for the visually impaired. And in These are all vital improvements to our authorities in the area. There will be increased Scotland all pensioners and people with transpor t system which are only made possible resources for rural community transport to help disabilities will benefit from free off-peak bus by Labour's successful management of the fund projects such as community minibuses, travel from October 2002. economy, and which can be delivered only dial-a-bus services, local community transport Road tax is being cut on smaller, cleaner through partnership between a Labour-led co-ordinators and voluntary car schemes. cars and duty reduced on greener fuels. Tax Scottish Executive and a Labour government We are committed to maintaining good, incentives are creating a cleaner lorry fleet at Westminster. af fordable transport links to secure the social while the road haulage industry will benefit and economic well-being of remote rural The Post Office and postal services from steep reductions in Vehicle Excise Duty communities, particularly in the Highlands and We are committed to high-quality, universal postal to among the lowest in Europe. We will also Islands. We will continue to sustain and develop ser vices and a dynamic Post Office able to thrive ensure that hauliers from overseas pay their lifeline transport links to remote and fragile in a world of technological change and increased fair share towards the cost of our roads. communities. Support for services to the competitive pressure. Labour is working with the Smar ter driving will be encouraged by new

banks to offer a new universal banking service. This will allow all benefit and pension recipients to receive their payments, at no charge, in full at the Post Office after the switch to Automated Credit Transfer in 2003. We also intend the local post office to become an invaluable resource for access to government information. There will be increased incentives for people to take over and modernise post offices. Business customers, representing by far the majority of the Post Of fice's turnover, want a full range of express, parcels and logistics services. We have given the Post Office greater commercial freedom in the public sector. It needs to be able to gain an advantage in the new postal market and become a leading force in domestic and international postal services through alliances and joint ventures. We want to help the Post Office keep up with the best in a fast-changing market. Energy Labour is committed to a secure, diverse and sustainable supply of energy at competitive prices. We are creating full competition in the gas and electricity markets. Coal and nuclear energy currently play important roles in ensuring diversity in our sources of electricity generation. We are putting an obligation on electricity companies to deliver ten per cent of the UK's electricity from renewable sources by 2010 (18 per cent in Scotland), with a doubling of combined heat and power. We will consider setting fur ther targets for renewables, with par ticular focus on offshore wind, solar and bio-mass technologies, suppor ted by a £100 million fund. It will back up the Climate Change Levy which includes agreements to improve efficiency in energy-intensive sectors, and the new Carbon Trust which will recycle £100 million to accelerate the takeup of cost-effective, low-carbon technologies. We will suppor t research into clean coal technology and investigate its commercial possibilities. We will promote home energy ef ficiency, doubling the expenditure on ener gy efficiency and raising building constr uction standards. Fuel poverty blights lives: that is why Labour in the Scottish Parliament has pledged to ensure that by 2006 all council and housing association tenants, and all pensioners in both public and private housing, will have war m and dry homes by installing central heating and insulation. BNFL is an important employer and major expor ter. The government insists it maintains the highest health, safety and environmental standards. We are examining the scope for turning the company into a public-private partnership. 4.Europe and the wider world Labour will be engaged and influential, fighting for the British national interest, as we set out in `Britain strong in the world'. We will support British Trade International, Locate in Scotland

and Scottish Trade International which promote Scotland as a location of choice within Europe, increasingly focus on higher-value research and development-intensive projects, and help Scottish companies globalise their activities. Labour's position on the single currency was set out by the Chancellor in 1997 and reiterated by the Prime Minister in February 1999. We have made it clear that, provided the economic conditions are met, membership of a successful Euro would bring benefits to Britain in terms of jobs, investment and trade. So in principle we are in favour of joining a successful single currency. But in practice the five economic tests we have set out must be met before the government would recommend entry to the single currency. An assessment of the tests will be carried out early in the next Parliament. If the government and Parliament recommend entry, the British people will have the final say in a referendum. So the choice is between a Conservative Par ty which will deny the people of Britain the chance to join even if it is in our national interest to do so, and the Labour Party which says that if it is in our national economic interest, the decision should be made by the British people in a referendum.

government is reviewing the effectiveness of the UK's current arrangements for information and consultation ­ works councils in larger firms operating across Europe ­ as well as consultation on large-scale redundancies. We will implement the findings of our review in this area. We support conciliation at the workplace, to avoid resorting to litigation. We will examine reforms that promote efficiency and fairness. Women still suffer an 18 per cent pay gap compared to men. We are committed to tackling the causes of this inequality. We will work with employers and employees to develop ef fective proposals, building on good practice and the sound business case in the private and public sector. We will develop career services for all. We aim for a ten per cent cut in death and major injuries at work by 2010, and will clarify responsibility, improve enforcement and toughen penalties for of fences. We are also committed to working with managers and employees to reduce the

Prosperity for all

Prosperity for all

No one left behind
Helping everyone become better off

Britain is better off than in 1997 but our ambition is to widen the winners' circle so more people share in the benefits of economic growth. In `A modern welfare state', we set out the route to full employment.
Fair and flexible work We are proud of our commitment to combine a dynamic economy with fair standards in the workplace. Labour has put right historic wrongs. Ever y employee now has the right to four weeks' paid holiday; trade unions have the right to recognition where a majority of the workforce want it; part-time workers have proper rights. Our objective has been to promote fairness that is consistent with the competitive position of British business; that will continue to be our position. We have reformed the labour market to build a durable and fair basis for constructive employee relations. As we learn from the reforms in the light of experience, we will keep their effectiveness under review. We want to strengthen partnership at work, which can foster employee commitment and help at a time of industrial change. We have established the Partnership Fund and want to expand it. Information and consultation need to be appropriate to national traditions, with timely discussion of problems. When large-scale redundancies are being considered, there is an especially strong case for consultation. The

Unemployment down... young people benefiting from Labour's New Deal

problems of bullying and violence at the workplace. As a major employer, our ambition is to improve the quality of work for our employees ­ helping recruitment and retention.
Prosperity for Scotland Lasting prosperity for Scotland can only be delivered through partnership. Only a Labour government at Westminster can be trusted to maintain the stable, macroeconomic framework needed for Scottish business to thrive and prosper. And only a Labour-led Scottish Executive can bring about the economic development that Scotland needs. Shared values, shared ambitions. While macroeconomic policy is the responsibility of the UK government, economic development ­ infrastructure, small business development, education/industry links, learning and skills ­ are the core tasks of the Scottish Parliament.

13


14

The Enterprise Agencies ­ Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise ­ have been refocused on their customers and the challenges ahead. Together they have over £500 million to help create a smart, successful Scotland. They have a key role in helping businesses to grow, promoting business startups, strengthening links between business and university, and improving the skills of the workforce. Labour in the Scottish Parliament is also committed to establishing a Manufacturing Advice Service. Inevitably, industries change ­ and where redundancies are announced, we will continue to use our innovative and successful rapid response teams through Par tnership Action for Continuing Employment initiatives. But the work of the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise to deliver sustained economic development in Scotland would be fatally undermined by a return to Conservative policies of boom and bust. That is why we need Labour at Westminster as well as at Holyrood. We are ambitious for Scotland's urban areas: we want to make them better places to live, and better places to set up a business. The Scottish Executive is drawing up a Neighbourhood Renewal Statement for Scotland, closely tied to our Cities Review. This will draw together all of the work which is going on in our approach to regeneration. Labour offers over the next five years £1 billion of tax cuts to increase capital investment in urban areas, for new businesses and for new housing. Housing Labour is also committed to using the Scottish Parliament to deliver high-quality social housing and promote community ownership (by means of stock transfer) and by investing in Scotland's housing stock. The £300 million New Housing Partnerships initiative will unlock up to £3 billion of new investment in homes currently under council ownership. Homelessness We have established a Homelessness Task Force which will report in November on how to deal with and prevent homelessness. The Rough Sleepers initiative is breaking the `no home, no job' cycle, investing £40 million over five years. Our target is to remove the need for anyone to sleep rough by 2003. We are improving support for young people who require additional support to make the transition to post-school education, training or employment, backed by £22.6 million to take forward action in response to the Beattie report. In partnership with Labour in Westminster, we are piloting Educational Maintenance Allowances to encourage more young people from low-income families to stay in education and achieve qualifications.

Rural Scotland The recent outbreak of foot and mouth disease has caused strain and distress in rural areas. Labour's priorities have been clear: to eradicate the disease as quickly and effectively as possible, to compensate those directly af fected, and to protect the wider economy. As the number of new cases falls significantly, and the clean-up of infected areas gathers pace, we are committed to supporting the most af fected areas with a recovery plan, and we shall examine the opportunities afforded by a move to more sustainable forms of land use. We will promote alternatives such as organic farming, agri-environment schemes and forestr y. We will conduct a scientific review of how to prevent animal disease outbreaks from occurring in the future and will introduce tough rules to back this up. But we must also learn some of the wider lessons and we will take the oppor tunity to examine all the options for the future of our rural economy and land use.

Labour is committed to improving urban Scotland

Agriculture and fishing Since the Second World War, the economy of rural areas has undergone massive change. About two per cent of the workforce are now employed in agriculture. The industry is par ticularly important because of the links with food production, our landscape and our environment. Labour's aim is to promote economic renewal with a sustainable future for farming, strengthened communities and sustainable land use. But that strategy can only be delivered through partnership. It needs a Labour-led Scottish Executive to drive it through, and a Labour government at Westminster to deliver the funding and the clout at European level to get the best deal for Scotland's farming communities. Short-term pressures need to be met. Since the early 1990s, sectors of farming have been hard hit by BSE, the weakness of the Euro and falling world commodity prices. Labour has provided £1.35 billion in short-term relief for farmers, including aid for diversification, farm business advice, better marketing, small

slaughterhouses and restructuring of the industr y. We have minimised many regulatory burdens and improved the way that food safety, environmental and animal health regulations are implemented. But British agriculture will only thrive in the longer term through a further, radical reorientation of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), away from distorting Europe-wide production subsidies towards more national responsibility for domestic farming, environmental and rural development priorities. CAP reform is now more possible; Labour's engagement with the EU gives us the best chance of making it happen. And Scotland is stronger in Europe as part of the UK. We have begun the process of change with our farming strategy and our seven-year, £3 billion rural development plans for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Labour will expand this programme so farming can become more diverse and responsive to consumers, and produce in a way that sustains and improves the environment. We have set up an independent, open and consumer-focused Food Standards Agency to ensure that all food meets the highest standards. We will argue for the extension of food labelling, to give consumers more choice. Genetically modified (GM) foods and crops have caused concern despite stringent safety checks. There should be high standards of safety ­ regulation must be strict to protect the environment and promote public health and consumer choice ­ but we must use science to establish the facts, the opportunities and the risks before taking final decisions in an open way. Many coastal communities in rural Scotland are dependent on the fishing industry. Labour believes the Scottish fishing industry has a

tourists to savour the finest examples of our heritage and of modern Scotland. Our promotion of Scotland as a quality destination for visitors from all over the UK and the world dovetails with our determination to promote quality Scottish products worldwide and the cultivation of cultural and economic links with people of Scots descent throughout the world. We have already allocated £5 million to visitscotland to encourage tourism from the rest of the UK and key markets around the world in the wake of the foot and mouth emergency. The immediate message that Scotland is open for business will be followed up with a new long- term recovery plan.
Coalfield communities Labour is committed to a £4.5 million package of help for Scotland's ex-mining communities. This will support local regeneration, including suppor t for new businesses. We will also honour our commitment to exminers suffering industrial diseases. We have set aside £4 billion to compensate those men, and the widows who nursed them, who suffered from lung disease and vibration white finger after working in Britain's mining industry. We will ensure that the compensation due is paid quickly.

Prosperity for all

Prosperity for all

Scottish idyll at Loch Katrine... Labour energetically promotes the tourism industry and Scotland's first national parks will open in 2003

bright future and we are committed to its sustainable future. In the short term, Labour is committed through the Scottish Executive to decommissioning around 20 per cent of the whitefish capacity so that catching capacity is matched to fish stock. We have also committed to assisting restructuring in the important fish processing sector and to building partnerships between fishermen and scientists to develop sustainable fishing methods. But we will also work at a UK level to reform the Common Fisheries Policy to preserve fish stocks for the future. In the short term, Labour is providing more than £60 million in structural funds over the next three years to help the industry while also tackling the problem of `quota-hoppers'.
Rural services Rural people share the same concerns as the rest of Scotland. We are committed to improving public services in rural areas. Following the Arbuthnott review of the distribution of health spending, rural health boards in Scotland will receive proportionally more funding, recognising the higher costs of delivering services in remote areas of Scotland. Scottish Homes' investment in rural areas will increase to £48 million, meaning 1,650 new and improved homes in rural Scotland. Labour is determined to protect Britain's landscapes and wildlife. Planning, transport and energy policy all make a difference. Scotland's first national parks in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs, and the Cairngorms, will be a reality by 2003. We are also committed to introduce legislation in the Scottish Parliament to give greater access to Scotland's land. Scotland's woods and forests directly suppor t more than 10,000 jobs in the

How Labour makes you better off:
· by saving money on your

mortgage, through economic stability and low interest rates
· by targeted tax cuts for

forestr y and wood-processing industries, and are one of the biggest recreational resour ces in Scotland. Labour in the Scottish Executive is implementing a forestr y strategy that will not only produce timber for the Scottish industr y but also enhance value and quality of the Scottish landscape and involve local communities. We will press ahead with a £1.8 billion programme of investment in the water authorities to support improvements in sewerage treatment and rural water supplies. We will move to a single water authority with a single board and management. The dangers of coastal and inland flooding are now widely appreciated, and we are committed to investment in preventative solutions, including more sensitive use of agricultural land. We have increased the number of protected nature sites. We have also initiated important steps to improve animal welfare in Britain and argued successfully for higher welfare standards for batter y hens and pigs across the EU.
Tourism Tourism is a vital industry for Scotland which holds great potential for the future. Supporting 180,000 jobs in every part of the country, the industr y forms part of Scotland's economic mainstream. Tourism generates £2.5 billion in revenue each year: five per cent of the Scottish gross domestic product. We support the energetic promotion of the Scottish tourism industry and will harness the UK's network of embassies and consulates to maximise its potential. At home, we are committed, in partnership with the Executive, to the improvement of our tourist attractions, accommodation and infrastructure, enabling

Our country led the first industrial revolution. Other countries got ahead in the second industrial revolution. Now our ambition is to succeed in the third industrial revolution ­ enhancing knowledge, speeding up communication and developing the talents of all the Scottish and the British people.

families and pensioners
· by improving living standards

through action to tackle Britain's productivity gap
· by investing in skills and training

and a revitalised infrastructure
· by offering a minimum wage of

£4.20 and an Employment Tax Credit

15


2

World-class public services
Our ten-year goals Halving the proportion of 16 to 19-year-olds not in training, education or employment, as we provide for 42,000 extra student places in Scotland by 2002. A healthier nation with fast treatment, free at the point of use, as we cut maximum waiting times for treatment. Our next steps
· A computer for every five secondary

Primary excellence... the vast improvements already made in primary schools are to be extended to secondary education

The whole country depends on high-quality public services. We have a ten-year vision for Britain's public services: record improvement to match record investment, so they deliver high standards to all the people, all the time, wherever they live. Since 1997, there has been investment with reform. Thanks to committed public servants, we have shown rapid progress is possible and begun to break the fatalism that says public ser vices are always second class. Now is the time to move for ward. Economic stability makes possible more investment. Health and education are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament, but the record funding made available through the Westminster Parliament makes the modernisation of Scotland's public services possible. A Conservative government would also mean £16 billion worth of cuts in public spending ­ which would mean less money available for Scotland's public services. The reforms outlined in this manifesto would therefore be jeopardised. Labour will put education and healthcare first. We promise reform to match. We will increase the quality and diversity of public services and meet the challenge of rising expectations. In education, we offer rising standards in primary and secondary schools. By 2010 we want a majority of Britain's young people entering higher education. In health, we will recruit extra nurses and doctors. Our ten-year goal is a healthier nation, with fast treatment, meeting rising expectations and demographic and technological challenges. The job of government is also to ensure that the enjoyment, excitement and inspiration of arts and sport come alive for everyone. Ser vices need to be highly responsive to the demands of users. A `spirit of enterprise' should apply as much to public ser vice as to business. But we can only achieve our objectives with Labour at Westminster and Labour at Holyrood.

pupils and four for every primary class
· 1,000 extra teachers for

Scotland's schools
· Cut in-patient waiting times with a

maximum waiting time of no more than nine months by 2003
· The biggest-ever hospital building

programme in Scotland's history
· All Scottish secondary schools to

have a sports co-ordinator

17


Labour's ambition for public services is simple: we want excellent services for all. Our challenge is to reverse decades of denigration and underinvestment. We will work with frontline staff to deliver a revival of our public services every bit as profound as the changes to the private sector in the 1980s. In our first term, national action was vital ­ to tackle crises of funding and quality. Government must take national responsibility for investment and for setting a clear national framework. Now we need to move on, empowering frontline staff. The citizen ­ the patient, the pupil, their needs and aspirations ­ must be central. Each service needs the right structure and incentives at local level ­ decentralisation of power with strong incentives to high per formance. Frontline staff are advocates for citizens and ambassadors for their services. Motivated by an ethos of service, they must be suppor ted to carry through change.

representing £1,000 for every man, woman and child in Scotland. And there has been a massive 64 per cent increase in spending on books and equipment. Spending on schools in Scotland will rise by over 40 per cent in real terms between now and 2003-04.
Under-fives All parents must receive the support they need to give their children a good start in life, so that ever y child starts school ready to learn. There is now a free nursery place for every four-yearold and the Sure Start programme provides special help for the most disadvantaged communities. We will continue to expand under-five provision. We will improve nursery education and childcare for working parents (see `A modern welfare state'). We will give ever y three-year-old, whose parents want one, a free nursery place by September 2002.

inclusion and equality of opportunity remain central to our commitment to liberate the potential of every child. But on their own they are not enough to guarantee high standards. Standards have risen in the past four years, with more good schools and the others improving. But the challenge ahead to make secondary schools meet the needs of all remains immense. We have begun to transform secondary education, building on the improvements we have seen in primary schools, and creating a secondar y school system which ensures that ever y child has the opportunity to benefit and gain qualifications. We have committed ourselves to ensuring that every young person will leave school with the maximum level of skills and qualifications possible, and that every 19-yearold is engaged in education, training or work. We are also committed to improving the per formance of the 20 per cent poorestper forming pupils at standard grade level.
Standards Through the Scottish Parliament's Standards in Scotland's Schools Act, we have extended the role of HMI to inspect education authorities as well as schools. These inspections are vital to ensure that every child receives education of a high standard. HMI has the responsibility to inspect all 32 local authorities during the next five years. The Act enabled us to set national priorities in education to ensure continuous improvement in school education. All authorities have to develop improvement objectives in relation to national priorities by December 2001 as part of the improvement framework. Schools will then publish development plans by June 2002. It is critical to our children's future success that tough and decisive action is taken to address identified weaknesses as soon as possible. Ever y child in Scotland now has the legal right to education geared towards developing their potential. We are promoting family-centred learning, which involves parents and focuses on the needs of the child, investing £15 million in schemes such as home-link teachers and other staff, family literacy schemes and parent suppor t groups to encourage parents to become involved in their children's learning. Teachers Nothing in education is more important than having good teachers. We have made teaching a far more attractive career, through our agreement for a 21st century teaching profession. We have agreed with teachers improvements in pay over the next three years in return for modernised working practices. Teachers will be able to concentrate on teaching. They will be freed from bureaucratic burdens. Good teachers should not have to

University summer schools, master classes, mentoring support and extra bursaries all have a role to play in encouraging potential students from disadvantaged areas through a new access package backed up by £18 million of funding. We will not introduce `top-up' fees and have legislated to prevent them. Since 1997 we have increased university funding, and through the Scottish Parliament have put in place a new system of student financial support with the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Suppor t) Scotland Act. We will strengthen research and teaching excellence, ensuring increased diversity with high standards throughout the university sector. It is vital that our world-leading universities are able to compete with the best internationally. We will also support world-class research and the development of Public-Private Partnerships. We are determined to ensure that our universities have the freedom and incentives to meet our ambitions for them.
Labour is committed to improving standards in Scottish schools

18

World-class public services

World-class public services

Education
Still Labour's number one priority

Education remains Labour's top priority. Excellence for the many, not just the few, is our driving passion. Our goal is to develop education to harness the individual talents of every pupil. Since 1997 rising standards have been achieved through major new investment and reform. The New Deal for Schools is a five-year investment programme of £116 million in schools. We are supporting a further £530 million of capital projects through Public-Private Par tnerships. We are investing in teacher numbers and rewards as we modernise the profession over the next three years and, through the Excellence Fund, £65 million will be committed to ensuring that 5,000 classroom assistants will be in our schools by April 2002. We will also ensure that the Scottish education system recognises and gives a proper place to the diversity of religious and cultural traditions that make up Scotland.

Nursery places for all three-year-olds in Scotland

Investment
Money alone cannot guarantee a good education, but extra investment is indispensable to achieve our ambitions. We pledge a further step-change in investment as we achieve a further step-change in higher standar ds. In 1997 Labour promised to increase the share of Britain's national income devoted to education. Over the Parliament we have increased it from 4.7 per cent to 5 per cent, and we are pledged to raise this figure to 5.3 per cent by 2003-04. In Scotland, by 2003-04 education spending will for the first time top £5 billion ­

Primary schools Primar y school teachers have achieved excellent results. We have already reduced class sizes for infants in primary one and two, and we are on course to meet our pledge to abolish infant class sizes of over 30 by August 2001. Our concerted drive for higher standards backed by a substantial increase in funding is reaping rewards. Last year saw the best-ever primar y results ­ with the proportion of 11-yearolds gaining the expected standard in reading, writing and mathematics all rising. But Labour will not be satisfied until every child leaves primary school with the basic skills they need. We will ensure that all children are on track to achieve high standards, or receive extra exper t help to catch up. Primary education without the basics is a betrayal. We will increase the proportion of children attaining appropriate levels in reading, writing and maths by the end of primary two and primar y seven. Secondary schools Transforming secondary education is a critical challenge of the next decade. The principles of

leave the classroom to improve their prospects. We want teaching to be a career of choice for the best graduates and attractive to people making career changes. We will continue to invest more in the profession and improve conditions for teachers. High status, better salaries and proper professional support are all essential. We have introduced a range of initiatives designed both to benefit children and to improve teachers' conditions: · Reduction in class sizes. · Introduction of classroom assistants. · Improvements in information computer technology (ICT) facilities, systems and training. · Repair of school buildings. · Improved continuous professional development. · Funding for an extra 1,000 teachers in Scotland's schools.
Schools fit to teach and learn in We are committed to building or substantially renovating 100 schools by 2003. We will follow up on increased investment in the improvement of school buildings through the development by 2002 of a comprehensive buildings strategy in par tnership with local authorities. Computers in schools A major programme is under way to train and suppor t teachers in the use of computers. Already, more than 8,000 teachers have been given help to buy their own personal computers, and more than 50 per cent of primary teachers and around 65 per cent of secondary teachers have a computer at home. £23 million has been allocated through the New Opportunities Fund to train teachers and librarians in the use of ICT in their subject area. We have provided the investment needed to

extend access to the internet, with all secondary schools now connected and a huge expansion in primary school connections, up from 40 per cent to 70 per cent for primary schools since Labour came to power. We are committed to increasing the number of modern computers to one for every five secondar y pupils and four in every primary class by 2002, and to enhancing their support for learning by providing broadband connections for schools. Labour will invest £80 million from the Excellence Fund over the next three financial years (1999-2002) to support the purchase of the necessary hardware and software, and we are on target to deliver by 2002. Already 66 per cent of secondary and 29 per cent of primary pupils have an email address, and by 2003 there will be access to an email address for every pupil. Higher education ­ a world leader Higher education brings on average 20 per cent higher earnings and a 50 per cent lower chance of unemployment. Already in Scotland we have opened higher education to a majority of young people before they are 30, combined with increased investment to maintain academic standards. But we need to do more to create oppor tunities for young people from all backgrounds. Access and excellence are the twin ambitions of our higher education policy. In 1997 we inherited a system where the number of qualified people able to go to university and college was capped. Today, the numbers are rising and universities have the funds to expand. We will maintain university entry standards, while intensifying efforts to extend to able young people from all backgrounds the huge advantages which a university education confers.

Getting a head start... every child needs good IT skills

Health
Quality services from a growing NHS

For over 50 years the NHS has been part and parcel of what it means to be British. If you fall ill, the NHS is there. Its foundations ­ tax-based funding and care according to need ­ remain as valid today as ever. NHS Scotland employs over 130,000 dedicated people. But it needs far-reaching reform to redesign its services around the needs of patients. Our National Health, Labour's Scottish health plan, sets out our strategy for ensuring fast, convenient, high-quality care in all parts of the country. In 1997 the NHS in Scotland was divided and fragmented, and staff were demoralised. Today, there are more nurses and doctors working for patients, and waiting lists and waiting times are falling. The biggest-ever hospital building programme is under way. NHS 24, the 24-hour helpline, is being piloted. Eye tests for people over 60 are now free.

19


But there is a lot more to do. We are committed to investment and reform. With Labour, the health budget in Scotland will grow from £4.9 billion in 1999-2000 to £6.7 billion in 2003-04: the biggest sustained increase in its history. Provided that as a countr y we continue to maintain the economic stability we have achieved so far, the Labour government will, if re-elected, be able to sustain significant funding increases for health in Scotland throughout the next Parliament. Labour in the Scottish Parliament will continue to put that funding to work to meet the needs and priorities of the Scottish people.
The fundamentals of care That money will help us get the basics right. We are recruiting and training more staff, and are investing in buildings, equipment and technology. Over the next five years, 10,000 nurses and midwives will qualify in Scotland ­ 1,500 more than previously planned ­ and we expect the number of consultants to rise by more than 600 over the same period. Mixed-sex wards are being abolished and mental health wards will be modernised. We have increased the number of one-stop clinics from 80 to 200, and we are building eight major new hospital developments by 2003, backed by a total capital investment of £480 million. Twelve major redevelopments of Accident and Emergency units are now under way. In addition, health centres and GP surgeries across Scotland are being refurbished and r edeveloped. We are investing an extra £7 billion of capital investment into the health service, with an extended role for a reformed Private Finance Initiative (PFI) which offers value for money, innovation, rising standards of service and a better deal for staff. We have said that PFI should not be delivered at the expense of the pay and conditions of the staf f employed in these schemes. We will seek ways in which, within the framework of PFI management, support staff could remain par t of the NHS team. Improving health Our job is not just to improve the nation's health ser vice. It is to improve the nation's health. Deaths from cancer and heart disease are too high. There has been a growing health gap between rich and poor. Beyond our commitment to combating child poverty and poor housing, we will tackle the long-standing causes of ill health and inequality by: · investing more than £100 million over four years in a National Health Improvement Fund · developing a strategy to tackle alcohol misuse · providing fresh fruit to nursery children and promoting healthy eating in schools · our new fairer, better way of sharing NHS funds

across Scotland to address the healthcare needs of deprived and rural areas. We remain committed to our Bill ­ blocked by the Tories ­ to ban tobacco advertising and sponsorship.
Reforming the NHS The NHS has to earn the confidence of each new generation. It has to change the way it works if it is to meet today's challenges and provide fast and modern services. We will improve access to primar y care so that patients can get access to a member of the primary care team within 48 hours. By 2003, we will cut maximum waiting times for inpatient treatment from 12 months to nine months. Major conditions like cancer, heart disease and poor mental health will have priority, with patients treated according to clinical urgency. We will give patients more choice. We have abolished the internal market. Now we are redesigning the system around the needs of patients. By 2002 we will launch a new generation of walk in/walk out hospitals where patients will be offered same-day treatment by specialist staf f. We will build on out-of-hours ser vices and launch NHS 24 to give round-the-clock access to health advice and ser vices. Through the introduction of an electronic appointments booking system by 2003, we will ensure that people know the time of their hospital appointment before leaving their local surger y. Labour's Action Plan for Dental Services in Scotland aims to radically improve Scotland's poor dental health. We will provide free toothbrushes and toothpaste for all babies under 12 months and for one- to three-year-olds in deprived parts of Scotland. Our aim is that by 2010, 60 per cent of five-year-olds should have no dental disease. By modernising maternity and children's ser vices in hospitals and communities, we will ensure that children and families receive the highest-quality support and care. We will further tackle the `lottery of care' through the setting of national standards and spreading best practice. We will ban by law human cloning, and implement a moratorium on the use of genetic tests for insurance, following a recommendation of the Human Genetics Commission. We will continue to examine demographic and technological challenges as they affect the NHS. Patients will have more say. By 2003 we will pilot and evaluate personal smartcards containing key medical data. Patients and local communities will be involved in the design and deliver y of healthcare and have more information on the quality of local services. Rebuilding a National Health Service To achieve this vision, we are setting clear national priorities and are developing a clear

and transparent process for holding the NHS to account for their delivery. We are streamlining bureaucracy and increasing integration and accountability in decision-making by establishing 15 unified NHS Boards, which will be responsible for developing a comprehensive local health plan to address the health improvement, health inequalities and healthcare needs of the local population. We will continue to develop the role of Local Healthcare Co-operatives (LHCCs),

20

World-class public services

World-class public services

Above: More flexible working hours for NHS staff Left: A bright future for frontline staff and patients

working with hospital services as vehicles for the planning and delivery of healthcare at local level.
NHS staff None of these aims can be achieved without major investment in the skill, working conditions and working practices of all NHS staff. We will continue to work in partnership with staf f to ensure they are valued and rewarded, and to improve working conditions through flexible working, enhanced training and development, and a safer working environment. This is a vision worth fighting for. It will take time to achieve but it will deliver an NHS to be proud of. While the Conservatives would cut the funding available to the NHS in Scotland in order to pay for reckless tax cuts, Labour is committed to making the National Health Ser vice once again the envy of the world.

Culture and sport
The arts and sports are key to our quality of life. They matter for their own sake. And today millions make their living out of their creativity. Government can and must make sure the oppor tunities are there. But for the last 20 years, under-investment, misplaced priorities, and lack of organisation have held back access and excellence. Since 1997, this has begun to change. We have started to invest and to reform the system. Investment in theatre develops the film and television stars of tomorrow; investment in

21


spor t will produce the Olympic and Paralympic medal winners of 2012. Culture and sport should not be seen as peripheral issues; they are vital to our identity and enjoyment as a country. We are pledged to the investment necessary to expand access and excellence together in culture and sport, building on excellence in film and broadcasting.
Spor t The performance of British athletes at the Sydney Olympics and Paralympics thrilled everyone. Labour is committed to a radical extension of spor ting opportunities and facilities. Sport is a good health policy, a good crime reduction policy, a good way of building communities. We have increased funding of Sportsscotland to a record level. We are putting sport back on the agenda at school. To help achieve this we will put sports co-ordinators into every secondary school, with 294 already in post, giving children the chance to receive qualified coaching and play competitive sport. We are promoting the involvement of young children in sports by widening the Active Primary Schools pilot. We will maintain the elite funding we put in place for individual athletics. We are developing a strategy for attracting

in six area institutes which will be local centres of excellence. To ensure that young footballers in Scotland maximise their potential, we are setting up a network of football academies working in par tnership with clubs, football authorities, local government, business and the wider community. We are committed to sell the Tote to a Racing Tr ust to allow it to compete commercially, with all long-term profits invested in the sport. We are committed to finding ways to support amateur sports clubs to which 5.6 million people belong. The House of Commons elected in 1997 made clear its wish to ban fox-hunting. The House of Lords took a different view and reform has been blocked. Such issues are rightly a matter for a free vote and we will give the new House of Commons an early oppor tunity to express its view. We will then enable Parliament to reach a conclusion on this issue. If the issue continues to be blocked we will look at how the disagreement can be resolved. We have no intention whatsoever of placing restrictions on the sports of angling and shooting. The Scottish Parliament is currently considering a private members' bill on hunting ­ the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill.

Around 30 million people enjoy arts activities each year. These activities are critical to national life, with huge importance for the creative and tourism industries. Yet the Conservatives introduced charges for admission to our national museums and galleries, cut the arts budget and reduced support for arts education. Since 1997, that has changed. National museums are now free for children and pensioners. Labour is committed to reforming the VAT system to ensure they will be made free for everyone from December. In Scotland, we have provided additional funding to back up our commitment to free access to publicly owned museums. Labour values our industrial heritage and is investing in our industrial museums. A £1.26 million funding package has been made available to three of our main industrial museums ­ the Scottish Fisheries Museum in Anstruther, the Scottish Maritime Museum in Ir vine and the Scottish Mining Museum in Newtongrange ­ along with their continuing suppor t from local authorities. We demonstrated our commitment to the arts in Scotland when we announced a £31 million package of resources. This includes £16 million of new money to be spent up to 2002 ­ over £7.7 million of this is for the performing arts.

access and offer arts education work, with national companies visiting schools and involving the community. We are determined to tackle digital exclusion. We have suppor ted the Public Libraries Challenge Fund, administered by the Scottish Librar y and Information Council, to establish learning centres in libraries, putting internet access in the heart of communities. From 2002 Culture Online will of fer children and adults alike tailored access to national collections complementing the resources available through the Scottish Cultural Resources Access Network. Public money devoted to the arts should be spent on excellent art, not bureaucracy. We will ensure that our arts funding system backs excellence, giving artists and arts organisations the long-term stability they need to become world leaders. At the very heart of Labour's arts policy in Scotland is the National Cultural Strategy, a framework for cultural development over the next four years. The strategy aims to ensure that public support for cultural activities is tar geted to achieve and sustain quality; that creativity, innovation and excellence are promoted; and that culture contributes to our wider priorities of social justice, economic development, regeneration and equality.

22

World-class public services

World-class public services

Ar t for all... the National Cultural Strategy promotes creativity, innovation and excellence

How Labour helps young people:
· by raising standards and

investing more in education, from nursery schools to adult learning
· by giving the majority of young

Creative industries The creative industries are a vital engine of our economy, providing jobs for over one million people across the UK. The National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA) has been set up to back our most talented young people. Creative entrepreneurs need seed funding, cheap accommodation near other similar companies, and advice on how to develop their talent into a business. Our Creative Industries Strategy aims to meet those needs ­ including start-up advice, services and funding for new businesses. Lottery Under the Conservatives, many communities missed out on their fair share of Lottery money. The number of Lottery grants to community groups has trebled with Labour. Yet there are still communities which have received a dispropor tionately small share of Lottery funding. We will ensure a fairer deal for these communities. Labour has reshaped the Lottery to match people's priorities. Money goes for revenue as well as capital. Lottery funding now ensures new ideas and ways of working that come from communities can be made real. The New Oppor tunities Fund (NOF) directs help to education, sport, health and the environment ­ after-school clubs, vital cancer-beating equipment, local green spaces. Lottery funding also supports our disadvantaged communities largely through the Scottish Arts Council's Social Inclusion

adults the opportunity to study in higher education
· by tackling youth

unemployment, with the New Deal made permanent
· by opportunities to train as

Par tnerships (SIPs) and through the Scottish Ar ts Council's new Arts and Social Inclusion National Lottery Scheme, with awards given in recognition of the role that the arts can play in improving the quality of life in areas already designated as SIPs. Through the Lottery Sport Fund, Sportsscotland is investing £1.5 million over three years in the 48 SIPs to increase people's participation in sport. We backed going ahead with the Dome as an oppor tunity to showcase British talent and give people a good day out in millennium year. Despite being enjoyed by more than six million visitors, the Dome did not fulfil expectations and we have learned the lessons, good and bad, from it. But the development of the Dome has been the catalyst for regenerating the local communities involved.

you work, through modern apprenticeships and the right to time off to study
Spor ting chance... Labour is committed to a sports entitlement for all children

· by expanding sports facilities

in schools and in the community
Education is the bedrock of an artistic society. Through our programme of designating schools with specialisms as centres of excellence, we are widening the availability of music, dance and drama training for more young people. We are working with all arts organisations to ensure they work to increase

major sporting and cultural events to Scotland. We will make every effort to bring the Ryder Cup to Scotland in 2009 and are joint funding a feasibility study with Sportsscotland and the Scottish Football Association on bringing Euro 2008 here. We have established a Scottish Institute of Sport in Stirling, and are investing

Ar ts We are ensuring there are more jobs, more wealth, and better health and housing, but we also want people to have more fun, more excitement and more beauty in their lives. We must ensure we provide opportunities for all these things.

· by cleaning up the environment,

with support for green technologies and global action to tackle climate change

We need a revolution in the status, standards and focus of our public services. Labour is prepared to make the investment in staff and services ­ and we are ready to match investment with reform. But while it is the job of Labour in the Scottish Executive to deliver reform, it can only get the job done if it has the necessary investment. And that can only be secured by a Labour government at Westminster.
23


3
Our ten-year goals Sustain a higher percentage of people in work than ever before as we seek full employment in Scotland. Child poverty halved and pensioner pover ty tackled as we extend oppor tunity for all children and security for all pensioners. Our next steps
· An `Employment First' interview for

A modern welfare state
As society changes, so the welfare state must change. We have a ten-year vision for an active welfare state: to promote work for those who can, security for those who cannot, and rewards for those who save, volunteer, learn or train. Since 1997, we have cut the costs of unemployment; saving £4 billion last year alone. As a result, we have been able to spend more on tackling poverty and raising family support within a social security budget that has grown, in Labour's first term, at the lowest rate since 1948. Employment is not just the foundation of affordable welfare; it is the best anti-poverty, anti-crime and pro-family policy yet invented. After years of mass unemployment, full employment is now on the agenda. Our ten-year goal is to sustain a higher percentage of people in work than ever before. With more than one million more people in work than in 1997, and a million vacancies in the economy, we need to extend the New Deal, not abolish it as the Conservatives propose. We judge our society by how we treat our young and the old. In this Parliament, over one million children have been taken out of poverty; our ten-year goal is to halve child poverty, ending it in a generation. We will transform support for children to achieve it. For those in retirement, security depends on partnership between state and funded provision. We promise that within two years no pensioner need live on less than £100 per week, increased annually in line with earnings growth. On top of that, we will reward pensioners who save. Government cannot achieve social inclusion for people, but it can help them achieve it for themselves, by transferring power and opportunity to local communities. That is our promise.
Employment for all is Labour's goal, with help for young people from the New Deal

everyone coming on to benefits
· Expanded support for children through

tax and benefit reform
· Extend and increase paid maternity

leave and introduce paid paternity leave
· New Pension Credit for lower- and

middle-income pensioners and the Winter Fuel Payment retained
· £90 million Better Neighbourhood

Fund

24


` Labour's goal

Full employment

With Labour, the welfare state helps people into work, makes work pay, supports them at work, and demands responsibilities in return. Our ambition is full employment for Scotland ­ good for the economy and good for social justice. The New Deal has already helped 32,600 young Scots into work. Long-term unemployment is down by over 60 per cent. The claimant count is the lowest for 25 years. But too many people are still denied the oppor tunity to work. Across Britain, a million people remain unemployed; 100,000 lone parents have come off income support since 1997, but our target is to raise the current 50 per cent employment rate to 70 per cent. Many people with disabilities who are out of work say they would like to work. Older people, with a wealth of talent and experience, are a resource we cannot afford to waste. Labour has ended the days of low-grade job schemes. The New Deal leads to real jobs, a lower benefits bill and higher tax receipts. We now need to build on its success, extending it to more people across the country. We also need to ensure that the barriers to work are pulled down by delivering on our obligation to tackle discrimination so that all people can make the most of their talents.
Making the New Deal a permanent deal The benefits system we inherited was fragmented, complex and contradictory. We are putting in place clear, consistent rules: those who can work should be in work or in contact with the labour market. As unemployment falls, we need further reform to help people into work. Labour will introduce a new principle of `Employment First', with rights and responsibilities balanced at every stage. The contract is simple: quality opportunities for real responsibility. `Something for something' is the foundation. Labour is pledged to create a new Working Age Agency, Job Centre Plus, merging the old Employment Service and Benefits Agency, and focusing on the key skill needs of areas of the countr y and sectors of the economy. Whoever you are, wherever you live, you will get the oppor tunities suited to your needs ­ from one of fice, one adviser, one system. The New Deals for young people and older workers will focus on numeracy, literacy, IT skills and presentation. Where people are homeless, or suffer drug or mental health problems, we will of fer specialist support. More than 140,000 adults aged over 25 have been unemployed for over 18 months. Labour will deliver more intensive and flexible help, with increased responsibilities for claimants.

We will offer greater flexibility to personal advisers and encourage greater engagement of employers, with IT training for all New Dealers. Employment Zones include funding for results and public-private partnership. On the basis of the evidence we will consider their extension to new areas and new claimant groups. We will build on the Action Teams for Jobs model, which is targeting 40 of the most severely disadvantaged areas, tackle the employment gap for ethnic minorities, and devote £45 million

where now all four-year-olds and 68 per cent of three-year-olds have a nursery place. All threeyear-olds will have a nursery place by 2002. Our vision is ambitious: safe and reliable childcare nationwide, allowing all parents to combine home and work, confident in the childcare they have chosen. We will help with the costs of childcare, through the Childcare Tax Credit ­ and will look to extend it to people looking after children with disabilities and shift workers. We will provide out-of-school care places for

government will ensure you are able to support yourself and your family. The minimum wage is the foundation. But we offer a guarantee of takehome pay too. For people with families, we promise to match your effort with support through the tax system. For those on low incomes without children we will create an Employment Tax Credit to boost their earnings, tackle poverty and improve work incentives.
People with disabilities Our ambition is to enable people with disabilities to play a full part in the community. The Disability Rights Commission now ensures full civil rights for people with disabilities; we have legislated so that those with special needs or disabilities have equal access to education. We are now committed to extending basic rights and oppor tunities as indicated in our response to the Disability Rights Taskforce. The New Deal for Disabled People pioneers new ways of helping people with disabilities into jobs. The opportunity to work is vital to civil rights; we are testing how best to offer help with rehabilitation and job retention. We will invest an additional £40 million to help people with disabilities into work, to ensure that it is wor thwhile to try out a job and stay in work if they have high care costs, and to improve assessment for equipment and services as people move in and out of work. We will not use disability benefits to disguise unemployment ­ the Tory approach in the 1980s. The number of people getting Incapacity Benefit (IB) has fallen by 11 per cent since 1997 but too many people are written off when they could, with support, work. We will help break down the barriers that keep people with disabilities out of work. We will continue to modernise the operation of the benefits system so that if people can work, we help them to do so and stop them slipping from lack of work to inability to work. Around 18 million working days are lost each year due to work-related illness ­ at a cost of over £17 billion. Many people on Industrial Injuries Benefit are helped into work by combining support with effective services, and we want to help as many of the rest as possible. But if people cannot work, society has a duty to provide security for them. For people unable to take up paid work, we are committed to offer security. We have increased support for children with parents on income support by 80 per cent in real terms since 1997. There is now a minimum income guarantee of £142 per week for people with disabilities under 60. Incapacity Benefit has been extended to people disabled from a young age. Disability Living Allowance has been extended to three- and four-year-olds. We will continue to keep the system under review.

Housing benefit Although the number of people claiming housing benefit is currently falling, it remains the main way in which accommodation is made af fordable. Our first priority has been to work with local authorities to drive up administrative standards and tackle fraud and error. But we must continue to reform it. So we will simplify housing benefit and its administration, distinguishing between people of working age and pensioners, reforming provision for private tenants and examining the case for longer awards. We will spread best practice in administration. In the longer term, we will ensure that for people of working age, housing benefit as well as the Working Families Tax Credit strengthens work incentives.

Britain will have a seamless system of child suppor t whether parents are in or out of work, paid to the main carer. Our aim is to make the goal of ending child pover ty in Britain a political litmus test for any political party running for office. The task for the next Parliament is to help another million children out of poverty.

26

A modern welfare state

A modern welfare state

Children and families
Strong and stable family life offers the best possible start for children. And marriage provides a strong foundation for stable relationships. The government supports marriage. But it has to do more than that. It must support families, above all, families with children. Our vision of the tax and benefits system for families and children is to provide help for all families; to give most help at the time families need it most; and to give more help to those families most in need. The Conservatives stacked the tax system against families; over four million children lived in poverty; one in five children were growing up in households without work; the average income of households with children had fallen to 30 per cent below the level for those without children. Labour has started to turn this round. We have raised child benefit for the first child by over a quar ter. The Working Families Tax Credit has meant a tax cut averaging £31 per week for 1.1 million families. In 2001-02, an average of nearly £500 above 1997-98 levels will be invested in ever y child in Britain. Personal tax and benefit changes have made families with children an average of £1,000 a year better off. We are pledged to go further ­ to eradicate child poverty in a generation and halve it by 2010. In the next Parliament we will make fur ther, major change. The Children's Tax Credit ­ the family tax cut ­ is worth up to £520 a year for five million families, with half a million families removed from paying tax altogether. It is paid until one parent earns more than £40,000 per year. From 2003, the Integrated Child Credit will bring together all existing income-related payments for children, providing most help to the neediest children, building on the foundation of universal child benefit. With the new system of child support, every family will receive at least £15 per week, and those most in need £50 per week ­ over £2,500 per year. For the first time

Investing in the future... new babies to get our Child Trust Fund

Skills for life... a young catering student works towards a vocational qualification

to provide stepping stones into employment for the hardest to employ. All lone parents will be invited to employment inter views to help them seek employment oppor tunities. We will build on the lessons of the Choices programme, which offers help with learning, work and childcare. Partners of unemployed people with children, like those without children, will also be asked to interviews to discuss their options. Parents need good quality and affordable childcare if they are to have real choice about work. For the first time, Scotland has a National Childcare Strategy ­ covering cost, provision and quality. Because of the tough public spending decisions we took in our first two years, we are now able to invest in proper childcare. Implementation in Scotland is ahead of target,

100,000 children by 2003. We will support the commitment of community and voluntary groups to build up a diverse range of childcare (see `World-class public services'). Many older workers now want to continue in work full- or part-time. Yet one in three people between 50 and state pension age is not working. To help them we will build on the New Deal 50+. To help bridge the divide between work and retirement, we will examine ways to ensure that people will be able to draw on their occupational pension and continue to work parttime for the same employer, phasing their retirement without compromising their pension. We are exploring how to facilitate the transition from work to positive voluntary activity. Our ambition of full employment is part of a deal: if you put in a fair day's work, the

Assets Our active welfare state has so far been based on work, finance and services. It is now time to add a fourth pillar to the welfare state ­ a programme to extend to all children the advantages that come from reaching adulthood backed by a financial nest-egg. Nearly a third of individuals have no financial savings or assets at all. People without assets are much more likely to have lower earnings and higher unemployment, and are less likely to start a business, or enter higher education. The government already encourages people to save for a rainy day, and save for a pension. We are determined to extend the savings habit to more people. But we are pledged also to use saving to promote opportunity for the next generation. All newly-born children will have an interestbearing Child Trust Fund set up in their name, with an initial endowment from the government, with more for poorer children. The endowment will be locked until the child reaches adulthood. We will provide incentives for extended family and friends, as well as parents to contribute to the fund. All the next generation will have the backing of a real financial asset to invest in learning, buying a home or setting up a business. Caring for children A safe childhood is not just about financial security. It is also about care for children, especially the 11,000 looked-after children in Scotland. Society is failing these children: they are more likely to suffer educational disadvantage, leaving school with fewer

27


qualifications, and are more at risk of being excluded from school. We have made available funding through the Scottish Executive's Excellence Fund and Children Services Development Fund so that local authorities can strengthen support for children and young people at school, including those within the care system. We are sympathetic to the case for a Children's Commissioner. For many children in care, adoption offers the best chance of success in life. We are reviewing adoption services in Scotland.
Family-friendly working For the majority of parents, time is precious. Many employers offer excellent schemes for family-friendly working. But we want to go further ­ with government funding to help parents devote more time to their children early in life. We want government to promote choice, because without our help, many people are denied the choices that should be theirs. A flexible labour market must work to the benefit of both employers and employees. Statutor y maternity leave is currently 18 weeks; we propose to increase it to six months. Statutor y maternity pay is paid at a flat rate of £60 a week; we propose to increase it to £100 per week, as big an increase in the next two years as in the past 40 years. Fathers currently have no legal right to paid time off on the birth of a child; we propose to introduce it for two weeks, also paid at £100 per week. We need to do more to help parents balance work and family. Many parents, especially mothers, want to work reduced hours when they do go back to work. We will work with business and employees to combine flexible working with the needs of business. Child Support Agency Some families break up. Government's role is to ensure that both parents retain responsibility for the financial support of their children where they are able to do so. We have always suppor ted the principle underlying the work of the Child Support Agency (CSA), but its introduction was bungled by the Conservatives. That is why we have already legislated to reform the CSA and these improvements will come on stream from 2002. A simple system will ensure a better deal for children, that fathers pay a fair share, that mothers benefit from their doing so, and that tougher action is taken against parents who do not comply.

pensioners ­ we honour your lifetime of work by ensuring that you share fairly in the nation's rising prosperity, and we are committed to tackling pensioner poverty. We will build a secure system on the foundation of the Basic State Pension. As a result of Labour's policies this Parliament, spending on pensioners will be £4.5 billion a year more in real terms than in 1997. Of this, £2 billion is going to the poorest third of pensioners. Our first priority was to help those on lowest incomes: we have lifted the incomes of the 1.7 million poorest pensioners by at least £800 a year, and for some couples by up to £1,400. Pensioner households are on average £11 per week better off than they were in 1997; and over three million pensioner households benefit from free TV licences for the over-75s. The pensioners' tax allowance means six out of ten pensioners pay no tax. We have halved the rate of tax they pay on savings income. We have pledged to extend tax allowances further so that by 2003 no pensioner pays tax until their income reaches £127 per week. We now need to go further. With Labour, the basic state pension will rise by 2003 to £77 a week for a single pensioner and £123 a week for a pensioner couple. We guarantee that the

save will find, for the first time ever, the gover nment rewarding their saving. Pensioner couples with an income up to £200 per week and single pensioners with income up to £154 per week will be rewarded for saving ­ the government adding up to 60p for each £1 of savings income up to a maximum of £23. In the process, we will abolish the weekly means-test for pensioners, along with the unfair test of savings, which penalises pensioners who have more than £6,000 in the bank. It is also vital to have in place long-term pension reform. We support a fair balance of public and private provision. Occupational and personal pensions, properly regulated, will continue to offer security for middle and high earners. We will continue discussions on annuity reform to ensure tax rules do not unnecessarily restrict the development of annuity products and markets. For low- to middle-income earners, stakeholder pensions cap costs, guarantee value for money, offer flexibility and drive down fees across the board. And for the lowest paid and carers, full-time parents and disabled people the state second pension will top up their pension contributions to give a decent pension in retirement to 18 million people. Today's pensioners have much to give to society. Our national health, Labour's health plan in Scotland, offers investment for older people to promote better health, and support independence. And the Scottish Executive has also announced new measures to improve the long-term care of the elderly. The Care Development Group is looking at the provision of long-term care for older people and will report in the autumn.
Carers Labour will tackle the problems faced by people requiring care, and the problems of carers themselves. The Scottish Executive launched its Carers Strategy in November 1999 and is investing to help unpaid carers in Scotland, earmarking £10 million for local authorities for services to carers. It has also provided £6.6 million since 1998 to 72 local health board area partnership projects to encourage joint working and planning of ser vices to help improve care and support for those with a mental illness. As part of that strategy, we will invest £36 million over the next three years to improve the lives of people with a learning disability and those who care for them.

to provide opportunities for young people and build strong, inclusive communities. Child poverty We are investing £42 million over three years through the Scottish Parliament in delivering Sure Start Scotland which will expand support for our most vulnerable families, benefiting at least 5,000 additional children by 2002. Over five years (1997-2002), £56 million is being invested in the Early Intervention programme, suppor ting a range of programmes to help children at the earliest stages of primary school to master the key skills of numeracy and literacy. Opportunities for young people We are on track to deliver 20,000 Modern Apprenticeships by 2003 to help young people make a successful transition to working life. Over 100 projects across Scotland have been funded by the Scottish Executive's New Futures Fund to support our most disadvantaged young people and to help them move towards employability. We will invest £100 million over the next three years to tackle drug misuse, including £21 million to provide effective drug education, suppor t and alternative activities for young people and the families of drug-misusing parents. Strengthening communities We are funding 48 Social Inclusion Partnerships to tackle exclusion at a local level in urban and rural areas. We are helping local authorities across Scotland to improve services to

28

A modern welfare state

A modern welfare state

One million children lifted out of poverty

How Labour helps pensioners:
· by boosting the basic state

pension for a single pensioner to £77 each week in 2003, £123 for couples
· by retaining the Winter

communities suffering deprivation with £90 million from the Better Neighbourhood Services Fund. Through Scottish Homes, we are providing at least 20,000 new houses for social rent and low-cost ownership over three years. Social economy To include the excluded, we are investing in the voluntar y and social economy sector. We are committed to having the sector as an equal civic partner. These are the organisations that are often closest to the disadvantaged and excluded. We want a strong voluntary sector that is a crucial partner in achieving our aim of social justice and equality.

of `spare' National Insurance numbers, that are a gateway to fraud.

Our welfare state is underpinned by clear values ­ we help you to help yourself, we invest in children, we suppor t our pensioners, we insist that no community be written off, and we minimise fraud and error. Our reforms will build a strong and inclusive society.

A popular welfare state
Labour's objective is to get the right benefit to the right people at the right time. We want those who are entitled to benefits to take up their rights to claim them. Fraud undermines confidence in the welfare system, so we are committed to reduce it. We have been prepared to be tough: preventing fraud by tightening gateways, sharpening sanctions on fraudsters, and with `two strikes and you're out'. We have saved £1 billion in fraud and error over the course of the Parliament by tightening up the way we administer income support. The introduction of Automated Credit Transfer will save a fur ther £100 million per year. Labour is committed to clear targets for fraud reduction for each benefit, including a commitment to halve the rate of fraud and error in income support and Job Seeker's Allowance by half by 2006, and to incorporate fraud prevention into the design of new policies on benefits and tax credits. We are also committed to data sharing between government agencies, and action to reduce to a minimum the number

Fuel Payment and free TV licences for over-75s
· by rewarding those who save

with the Pension Credit
· by raising the Minimum

Security in retirement... state pension to rise with Labour

Income Guarantee to £100 each week (£154 for couples) in 2003
· by tackling discrimination

Pensions and pensioners
In 1997, Labour made a clear commitment to ensure that pensioners share fairly in the rising prosperity of the nation. At this general election, we repeat our commitment to

Minimum Income Guarantee will be uprated each year in line with earnings throughout the next Parliament. In 2003 this will mean no single pensioner will have an income below £100 per week and no pensioner couple an income below £154 per week. Labour introduced the Winter Fuel Payment. Its level is set each year. Last winter it was raised to £200. For next winter, it will also be £200. We will also do more to reward pensioners who have saved. Pensioners who work and

against over-50s in healthcare and in the workplace
· by boosting police numbers

Social justice
Labour is committed to using the power of the Scottish Parliament to deliver social justice; to eliminate child poverty within this generation;

and cutting overall crime and crimes like burglary that affect senior citizens the most

29


4 Strong and safe communities
Peace of mind... Labour has raised police numbers to their highest-ever level

Our ten-year goals A modern criminal justice system. Responsive local government with high-quality services. Our next steps
· Extra funding to maintain police

We all know the sort of Scotland we want to live in ­ a Scotland where we can walk the streets safely and know our children are safe. We have a ten-year vision: a new social contract where ever yone has a stake based on equal rights, where they pay their dues by exercising responsibility in return, and where local communities shape their own futures. Overall crime is down in Scotland and police numbers are now at their highest-ever level. Our strategy is clear and consistent ­ tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime. Our ten-year goal is a modern criminal justice system at every level, from police to courts to prison ­ putting crime reduction centre stage. And because crime is changing, crime-fighting has to change too ­ to tackle repeat-offending, drug-related and organised crime. We are investing to raise police numbers even further. Safe communities reclaim their streets; then they can shape their own affairs. But the drugs problem is a Scottish, a British and an international problem. It therefore requires Scottish, British and international solutions. And although Scotland's criminal justice system is the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament, the investment needed to implement the measures outlined in this chapter can only be delivered by a Labour government, and the international action to take on the drug barons will benefit from the determination and standing of the British government.

recruits at record levels
· New powers to seize the assets of

drug traffickers and other major criminals
· Scotland's first drug court · A Bill to protect vulnerable and

intimidated witnesses
· New freedoms, with a duty of

Best Value for local government

31


Responsibility from all
Winning the battle against crime

Labour is delivering on crime in Scotland. The respected Scottish Crime Survey shows that crime, as measured by the survey, is at its lowest level for 20 years. But we are not satisfied. Drug-related crime is a menace. Recorded violent crime is still too high ­ partly because more domestic and racial violence is being reported ­ but also because street robbery, especially of mobile phones, has risen. And new crimes are being committed ­ fraud through the internet, human trafficking. The only way to reduce crime is by being tough on crime and tough on its causes. Government can help families and communities prevent crime. But when people do commit crimes, we need an effective criminal justice system able to catch, punish and rehabilitate people.
Supporting the police Labour is committed to supporting the police ser vice in its role of reducing crime and disorder in Scotland's communities. One of our first priorities in government was to reverse the under funding of the police force under the Tories. Over the three years to 2003-04, around an additional £166 million will be invested on the police in Scotland. These additional resources will help to recruit more frontline officers. Scotland's police forces are officially at record strength, according to new figures published in April. There are now 15,149 officers in Scotland, more than ever before. This is up by 365 since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. We have encouraged the use of technology to free up police time for front-line duties and are committed to developing a Scottish Police Information Strategy. An extra £1.7 million has been provided for DNA detection work, and this will allow an extra 15,500 alleged offenders to be sampled. Police have a much broader role than law enforcement. They have a key role to play in preventative intervention, working alongside a range of outside agencies to build safer communities. We support community policing and a stronger link between police and the communities they serve. Community safety strategies combine the efforts of local authorities, community partnerships, the police and the private sector to implement crime prevention and detection methods which meet the needs of that particular community. It is only through this type of partnership-based working that the most vulnerable members of our communities will feel safe on their streets and in their homes. By employing methods such as CCTV, improved street lighting and increased property security, alongside innovative community projects such as those designed to address

Police on parade... Scotland's police forces are officially at record strength and have delivered results where it matters ­ on the streets

anti-social behaviour among young people, and by offering support to victims of crime, community safety strategies have the potential to address wider community safety issues. The CCTV Challenge Competition generated in excess of £23 million of capital expenditure, which will result in the installation of 1,878 cameras in rural and urban areas. We are committed to restructuring common police services in order to improve the ef fectiveness of the support provided to police forces through these shared services. A new Scottish Intelligence Database ­ a police `supercomputer' will mean that Scotland's eight police forces and the Drug Enforcement Agency will share the same secure intelligence at all levels, with better links to forces in the rest of the UK and beyond.
Tackling serious crime and disorder Labour is determined to tackle the serious crimes which heighten people's fears and bring misery to our communities. There is an unacceptable culture of violence that is linked to alcohol, drugs, domestic abuse and street crime. The Safer Scotland campaign was launched in September 2000 and all eight Scottish police forces combined to reduce violent crime by 7.7 per cent in the last three months of 2000. One in five of all violent crimes occurred in or around licensed premises. Violent crime Violent crime rose sharply under the Tories and is still too high. We have taken action. A nationwide police crackdown on violent crime and criminals led to a significant fall in violent crime in the three months to January 2001, with murders down 44 per cent from the same

period in the previous year. Scotland's police have delivered results where it matters most ­ on Scotland's streets. As a direct result of this campaign, violent crime has fallen, fewer dangerous weapons are in circulation and more thugs are aware that our society will no longer tolerate their behaviour. We look forward to continuing reductions in violent crime in the future.
Domestic violence Labour is committed to tackling domestic violence on every front. Domestic violence damages many areas of the lives of victims. Domestic violence blights lives, including the lives of children, destroys opportunities and excludes people from society in many ways. Labour has prioritised tackling domestic violence in Scotland and giving support to victims. We have established the Scottish Partnership on Domestic Abuse, and in November 2000 we allocated £18 million to fund measures in the national strategy. This will ensure enough refuge spaces for everyone who needs one in Scotland, and take forward national priorities including a prevention strategy. Youth crime Persistent offending by young people damages too many of Scotland's communities. It creates victims, destroys property and ruins lives. It costs society resources which could be better spent. Labour is committed to supporting children's hearings, increasing their budget by 50 per cent over the next three years, because a wellresourced hearing system is central to tackling the problem of repeat young offenders. We are addressing youth crime in a manner which is serious about preventing young people

32

There will be a doubling of the programme next year, and an extension of its area of operation. To tackle drug misuse, we will: · ensure that all schools provide a programme of drug education to every pupil by 2002 · aim to increase those being seen by treatment ser vices for the first time to 16,500 (up by 50 per cent) by 2004 · reduce the known proportion of under-25s being of fered and using illegal drugs · provide additional access to treatment oppor tunities for 2,500 offenders, through a Drugs Tackling drugs effectively will protect the health range of community disposals targeting drugrelated crime by 2004 of our young people and impact on crime. Recent research in Glasgow suggests that at · expand rehabilitation services to equip former one time drug addicts were committing an drug users for a life free from drugs estimated 2.6 million offences a year, mostly · increase support for families of drug users, involving shoplifting, theft and drug dealing. par ticularly for the children of drug-using parents A modern society cannot tolerate that kind of · provide comprehensive drug treatment disr uption to community life. Our Drugs Action packages in Scottish prisons. Plan, published last year, involves action We have announced, for the first time ever, across government departments. Over the next three years we will commit an extra £100 million to dealing with drugs. With these additional resources we will continue to pursue a strategy that works, combining action against the dealers with comprehensive measures embracing prevention, education, treatment and rehabilitation, leading to new oppor tunities for former drug misusers. We have announced a pilot for Scotland's first drug court in Glasgow. We will continue our work to combat drug crime and take steps to confiscate the proceeds of drug dealers' crimes through the Proceeds of Crime Bill. Drugs is a global business and Labour will simplify the law on extradition to target drug traffickers. We will follow the money Primary school children learn about safety trail, through bureaux de change to offshore accounts, to convict them, and remove their measurable targets in the fight to cut both the money and passports if we do so. demand for, and the supply of drugs. One target is to cut drug deaths by at least a quarter over the next five years, another to increase the The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency number of drugs seizures by 25 per cent The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency brings by 2004. in a strategic and tactical capability for tackling drug crime at all levels. It is backed by additional funding of £10 million over the next two years Victim support earmarked for the enforcement effort. This will We recognise that the interests of the victim strengthen both the centre and local forces by should be at the heart of the criminal justice up to 200 additional officers. system. This includes effective communication At the same time, we are increasing with them and feedback to them. Uncertainty resources for drug squads at a local level within about criminal justice processes and lack of communities. Resources to support local Drug information about case progress can add to the Action Teams have doubled and £3.1 million suf fering of victims following a crime. has been committed over three years to expand The delivery of a Scottish Strategy for Victims drug testing and treatment pilot schemes, and is a huge achievement for Labour in government we will support community-based projects in Scotland and for all the agencies that have through our new Scottish Communities Against worked with us. Key elements include: Drugs initiative. · Through a pilot victims' statement scheme, for the first time, victims will be able to put down, in their own words, how the crime has Drug misusers af fected them. We are piloting Drug Treatment and Testing Orders to deal with those offenders who are · Improving information for victims and their committing crimes to fund their drug misuse. families on the progress of cases and on the from adopting a career in crime. Swift and ef fective action must be taken, and rehabilitation must be an option for the young people who could benefit. Labour has committed an additional £3 million to developing effective alternatives to custody for persistent young offenders, and we announced a new national network of challenging programmes for persistent young offenders ­ leading to safer communities, fewer victims and fewer wasted lives.

release dates of offenders.
· Enabling Victim Support Scotland to roll out the

Strong and safe communities

Strong and safe communities

Witness Service to all Scottish cities. We will introduce a Bill which will protect vulnerable and intimidated witnesses by preventing an accused person in a trial for rape or another sexual offence from cross-examining a victim witness personally, and also tighten up the restrictions on questioning of the victim as to their previous sexual history and character. · Investing £2 million in the new support scheme for witnesses at criminal trials throughout Scotland. Pilot support schemes have been well received by witnesses who found it reassuring and helpful. Victim Support Scotland has over the years played a vital role in assisting victims, providing suppor t and information to victims through home visits, office appointments or by telephone. Labour in government has substantially increased the budget of Victim Support Scotland, by 13 per cent between 1998-99 and 19992000 to over £1.7 million. And Victim Support Scotland is being fully funded by the Executive to provide a witness service in all Scotland's sherif f courts over the next two years.

Our diverse nation
Labour believes that Britain can be a model of a multicultural, multi-racial society, where people live and work together on the basis of respect not prejudice. In the last four years, there has been major legal change; now is the time to build on that basis the inclusive society that is in tune with British values. Our commitment to protection for every citizen is expressed in the 1998 Human Rights Act. It ensures that British citizens are able to enforce rights in our own courts. Other legal change was necessary too. The Race Relations (Amendment) Act learns the legal lessons of the shocking death of Stephen Lawrence, and places a positive duty on all public bodies to promote equal opportunity. We abhor racism and shall continue to implement the recommendations of the Macpherson report. Section 2a of the Local Government Act has been repealed. The UK now has the most comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation in Europe. But an inclusive, tolerant, open society, where people rise on their merits, depends on culture and action as well as law. On the basis of the legal changes we have made, we now need to reduce the barriers ­ to ser vices, opportunities, institutions ­ that still hold people back. This applies in the public and private sector. There are too few black and Asian staf f in key public services and, in almost all organisations, far too few in middle and senior grades, which is why we now have targets for

33


the diversity of central government and many other public services. Voluntar y and community organisations are key to Labour's vision for Britain. From large national charities to local community groups and faith-based institutions, these sectors are a vital and diverse part of national life. We have changed the tax rules to encourage individuals and businesses to give to charity, supported initiatives to increase volunteering, involved voluntar y and community groups in the design and delivery of key government programmes, and helped charities build up their capacity to do their job even better. Labour will build on its Compact with the voluntar y sector, as we develop more far-reaching par tnerships for the delivery of services and the renewal of our communities. We will also build on our financial incentives to volunteering, by developing an effective infrastructure to suppor t voluntary work in every community in Britain. We welcome the contribution of churches and other faith-based organisations as a partner of local and central government in community renewal.
Immigration People from abroad make a positive contribution to British society. As our economy changes and expands, so our rules on immigration need to reflect the need to meet skills shortages for the benefit of all. The Primary Purpose Rule which split families and did nothing to stop abuse has been ended. A right of appeal for family visitors has been introduced. Our immigration rules will remain clear, firm and fair, and help to ensure that those who come and work here continue to make a major contribution to our economic and social life. Asylum It is right that people fleeing persecution are able to make a new life as hard-working citizens in a new country. Britain has a long record of providing a home for such people, and it is impor tant that we maintain this position. But asylum should not be an alternative route to immigration: it is designed for people with a well-founded fear of persecution. The UK is ninth per head of population among European nations for asylum applications. The key is to hear cases swiftly as well as fairly. By cutting the decision-making time and increasing the processing of claims to over 10,000 a month Labour has reduced the backlog we inherited. We have tightened controls against traffickers and introduced a civil penalty for lorry drivers who bring in illegal immigrants. A national support system has been introduced to relieve pressure on local authorities. Asylum seekers and their dependants whose claims are rejected will be removed from Britain, with the aim of more than

30,000 removals in 2003-04. We will also help those granted refugee status to integrate into the local community by, for example, ensuring they have access to the New Deal and work oppor tunities to get off benefits and into work. We support tough penalties for those who engage in the barbaric trade of human traf ficking. We will bring forward proposals to ensure a common interpretation of the 1951 Convention across the EU and to improve the international response to regional crises.

Political renewal
This manifesto sets out Labour's offer for change and renewal at Westminster. But change comes from the bottom up as much as the top down. For the last 50 years, governments have failed to respect this basic truth.
Local and regional government Local authorities are responsible for the effective deliver y of many of Scotland's core public ser vices. The staff and councillors who work for the community often have the hardest jobs. The best of local government is an inspiring example of what government can achieve. We have replaced Compulsory Competitive Tendering (CCT) with Best Value, which requires local authorities to take a strategic approach to ser vice delivery. We have established a £26 million Modernising Government Fund to support new and innovative projects from across the public sector, including those which harness new technology and promote integrated working. And we have given councils new powers to develop new initiatives to help their local communities. After years of Tory cuts and centralisation we

have brought back stability to local government finance with an end to crude and universal capping and allowed three-year settlements to allow councils to plan their services more ef fectively. We are providing additional support to local authorities dealing with high levels of deprivation. And we are modernising the political management of councils while raising ethical standards in local government. When public services are delivered in partnership with the private and voluntary sectors, it should be on the basis of best value not worst labour standards. The TUPE regulations protect the rights of any transferred employees. Newly-hired workers are protected by minimum standards at work. We will use a wide-ranging review of TUPE regulations to consider whether unfair disparities are being created between these two groups of workers.
Devolution In England, we are committed, as Regional Development Agencies take on more power, to enhance the scrutiny functions of Regional Chambers. For some regions this degree of political representation will be sufficient. However, in other parts of the country there may be a stronger sense of regional identity and a desire for a regional political voice. In 1997 we said that provision should be made for directly elected regional government to go ahead in regions where people decided in a referendum to support it, and where pre-dominantly unitary local government is established. This remains our commitment today. Devolution has strengthened the UK, preser ving the Union on the basis of a fairer par tnership. The Nationalist lie has also been exposed: the UK is strong enough and flexible enough to devolve power while retaining the

benefits of staying together. The UK Parliament makes the essential financial allocations to all devolved bodies. English MPs make up 85 per cent of the UK Parliament, so there is no case for threatening the unity of the UK with an English Parliament or the denial of voting rights to Scottish, Welsh and Nor thern Ireland's MPs at Westminster.
Northern Ireland We have made working for peace in Northern Ireland a priority. The Good Friday Agreement was overwhelmingly supported by the people of Nor thern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland. While it has not brought a perfect peace, and while the peace process has not been smooth, it has made life immeasurably better. Nor thern Ireland now has its own Assembly and Executive. They have produced their first programme for government and first Budget on a cross-community basis. The security situation has been transformed. People can walk again on the streets of Belfast, free from fear. Troops no longer patrol in the vast majority of the Province. And the number of murders has been drastically reduced. We will build on these foundations to ensure that the Good Friday Agreement is implemented in full and the new institutions take root. We will establish a modern, responsive and fully accountable police service properly representative of the two main traditions in Nor thern Ireland and enjoying their trust and suppor t. And we will bring about the key reforms in the civil and criminal justice system which secure the respect and trust of both traditions. Parliamentary reform The House of Commons is now more representative than ever before, yet only one in five MPs is a woman. Labour increased women's representation five-fold in the 1997 Parliament through all-women shortlists. And in the selection of candidates for the elections to the Scottish Parliament, we took action to ensure fairer representation of women. As a result, half of the 56 Labour MSPs are women. We are committed, through legislation, to allow each party to make positive moves to increase the representation of women. Labour will continue to modernise the procedures of the House of Commons so that it can effectively fulfil its functions of representation and scrutiny. The government has introduced major innovations in the electoral systems used in the UK for the devolved administrations, the European Parliament, and the London Assembly. The Independent Commission on the Voting System made proposals for electoral reform at Westminster. We will review the experience of the new systems, and the Jenkins report, to assess whether changes might be made to the

34

Strong and safe communities

Strong and safe communities

Devolution delivered... Labour has returned power to the people of Scotland

electoral system for the House of Commons. A referendum of the people remains the right way to agree any change for Westminster. We are committed to completing the House of Lords reform, including removal of the remaining hereditar y peers, to make it more representative and democratic, while maintaining the House of Commons' traditional privacy. We have given our suppor t to the report and conclusions of the Wakeham Commission, and will seek to implement it in the most effective way possible. Labour supports modernisation of the House of Lords' procedures to improve its effectiveness. We will put the independent Appointments Commission on a statutory footing.

Whitehall Our civil service is world-renowned for its independence. Labour is committed to maintaining the political impartiality of the civil service. But it needs reform to make it more effective and more entrepreneurial. There have been important reforms in our first term. We want to take further radical steps for ward to ensure the civil service has the skills base necessary to meet the challenges set out in this manifesto.

How Labour is tackling crime:
· through new powers to seize the

assets of drug dealers
· by extra funding for the Scottish

Equal rights for all, proper enforcement of the law, and reformed structures of self-government: these are the foundations of a strong civic society. Labour offers opportunity with responsibility ­ the right combination for Britain in the 21st century.

Drug Enforcement Agency and Scotland's first - ever drugs court
· through extra money for the

recruitment of more front-line of ficers
· by using information technology

to free up police officers for front - line duties
· by providing more CCTV cameras

in rural and urban areas
· by tackling the causes of crime

through measures like the New Deal and action on truancy
35

Multicultural Britain... an inclusive society begins at school


5 Britain strong in the world
Our ten-year goals Europe to have the most competitive knowledge-based economies in the world as British ideas lead a reformed and enlarged Europe. Delivering Kyoto and international development targets as we help tackle climate change and global pover ty. Our next steps
· Lead economic reform in Europe · Work for the re-start of world trade

Britain needs a government ready to stand up for our interests and values. We have a ten-year vision for British foreign policy: a leading player in Europe, our alliance with the United States strengthened, using our global connections to help Britain and tackle global problems. Unlike the Conservatives, we see Europe as an opportunity, not a threat. Because we participate fully, we are able to work with our partners to shape an EU agenda that advances our national interests. We will put democratically elected national governments clearly in the driving seat of EU policy. Our tenyear goal is to work with our partners for Europe to have the most competitive knowledge-based economies in the world. We hold to our promise: no membership of the single currency without the consent of the British people in a referendum. Britain has some of the best armed forces in the world. With Labour, they are being developed to meet the challenges of the post-Cold War world. Labour is committed to leading the development of a comprehensive agenda for poverty reduction and sustainable development. We want to mobilise the international community to deliver the International Development Targets, generate growth and equity in developing countries, and help them benefit from global economic integration. We are convinced of the science of global warming. We pledge to meet tough national targets for environmental protection, and will work at international level to halt and reverse climate change. We face a choice between an inward-looking chauvinism that leads to isolation, and a modern patriotism where the British national interest is pursued through international engagement.

Global responsibility... Labour is increasing funding for our armed forces

talks
· Strong, effective and responsive

armed forces
· Raise international aid towards UN

target
· Be the first country to introduce

greenhouse gas trading to cut pollution

36


38

Britain strong in the world

Britain strong in the world

Reform in Europe
Europe is changing. Economic reform is under way in the EU, with over two million new jobs created last year. Many new members are going to join the EU. Co-operation is being extended in defence and security policy. A new way of conducting EU business has been born ­ comparing best practice to share the benefits of diversity in order to reduce over-reliance on centralised regulation. We face a very simple question. Do we want to be part of the change, influencing its direction? Or do we want to opt out? We have spent 50 years on the margins; it is time to make the most of our membership. We have seen the alternative. By 1997, Britain had retreated into itself: business was global, people travelled and worked around the world, our culture was open to new ideas,

be even better for Britain. Together with vir tually all other European countries, we do not support a United States of Europe. But we do believe a Europe made up of nation states and offering a unique blend of inter governmental co-operation where possible and integration where necessary, can be a major force for good ­ for its own members and in the wider world. We want to take Europe forward, to meet British needs.
A Europe of prosperity Europe is a crucial market, accounting for more than half of our trade. Britain has secured a shift in economic policy in Europe ­ away from harmonisation of rules and towards a system based on dynamic markets allied to comparison and promotion of best practice. The key priorities are to deliver more choice and lower prices through liberalisation of financial services and utilities, to promote business development with a common EU patent and cuts in red tape, to develop our common research effort in frontier technologies like bioscience, cut delays and fares by establishing an integrated Air Traffic Control system for Europe; and to develop ef fective labour market policy to tackle unemployment in dialogue with the social par tners. We support efforts being made across the EU to reform welfare states, modernise social partnership and advance social inclusion. EU state aid policy should bear down on aid that distorts the single market while supporting economic modernisation. We will keep the veto on vital matters of national sovereignty, like tax and border controls. Trade has been a vital source of prosperity for Europe's citizens. Our vision is of an open European economy. That requires a genuine single market, in an open world trading system. A wider Europe New countries joining the EU will give Britain a bigger market and Europe a bigger voice. Membership will help guarantee the freedoms of the new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe. Labour is pledged to do all it can to enable the first group of applicant countries to join in time to take part in the next European Parliamentar y elections in 2004. It is vital that we ratify the Treaty of Nice which is essential to enlargement; Labour in government will do so. The Conservatives have said they will insist on trying to renegotiate Europe's treaties at the first summit after the general election. No other country agrees with this. That means that a Conservative government would either have to back down in the face of opposition, or take Britain out of Europe altogether, with disastrous consequences for Britain. Our argument is that if Britain is stronger in

Europe, it will be stronger in the rest of the world. We reject the view of those who say we must choose between Europe and the USA. We shall remain the USA's firm ally and friend; but we are not going to turn our backs on Europe. The USA and Europe account for ten per cent of world population but 60 per cent of global GDP; working together we can tackle many problems and spread the benefits of freedom, peace and prosperity.
A Europe of the future The main sources of popular legitimacy in Europe remain national governments and parliaments. So national governments should be seen to be setting the agenda of the EU, with the European Council setting the EU's priorities, a strong independent Commission ensuring that the European interest is heard and enforced, and an effective European Parliament improving draft legislation and holding the Commission to account. Labour wants the next Inter-Governmental Conference in 2004 to address public concerns about the way the EU works, spelling out in a clear statement of principles what should and should not be done at European level. Labour supports a stronger role for national parliaments in European affairs, for example in a second chamber of the European Parliament, with a particular remit to oversee the division of competences. We will also insist that the Commission completes its internal reform programme.

Defence
Britain's national security is based on the mutual support that comes from membership of NATO. That will not change. And although Britain has rarely been more secure from foreign invasion, there are new threats to our people from crime and terrorism . Instability around the world can affect us directly and we have a global responsibility to play our part in reducing international conflict, controlling the spread of weapons of mass destruction, and contributing to international peacekeeping and peacemaking operations. To enable the EU to act where NATO chooses not to, the EU should improve its militar y capabilities for humanitarian, peacekeeping and crisis management tasks. Our armed forces are the best in the world at fighting if they have to and keeping the peace where they can. Labour is committed to investing more in real terms in our armed ser vices over the next three years, the first year-on-year real increase in funds for over a decade. An important part of that investment will be in better service accommodation. We are determined to recruit and retain the best

Britain Britain is leading reform in Europe

yet our government was closing itself off. And Britain got a worse deal. Because they were backward-looking and divided on Europe, the Conservatives were weak and ineffective in Europe; and because of their weakness in Europe, Britain lost influence around the world. We lost our say over decisions that af fected our lives. In the last four years we have seen the benefits of engagement. Our rebate has been protected and our contributions are falling to similar levels as those in France and Italy. The Labour model of defence co-operation ­ giving Europe the option to act where NATO chooses not to ­ has won through. Economic reform is now helping the European economy. The veto on crucial issues of national sovereignty like tax is safe. All this happened only because Labour had the strength to get involved, argue for its ideas and persuade others to follow us. Labour believes that Europe brings benefits for Britain, and that a Europe, reformed by British ideas and working with our MEPs, will

people, from all walks of life and all backgrounds. We also will look after the interests of Britain's veterans. We have doubled funding for research on Gulf War illnesses and will continue this important work. In 1997 Labour promised a Strategic Defence Review. Today, that review is admired around the world for its clarity, efficiency and foresight. We need more mobile and more flexible armed forces, with the ability to project force at distance and speed, to work closely with other nations and international bodies, and to fight and keep the peace. In Kosovo and Sierra Leone we have shown what this means in practice, and our servicemen and women have responded magnificently. We are determined to maximise resources for front line use by disposing of surplus spares and promoting smart procurement and ef ficiency savings. The European Defence Initiative is an impor tant part of our defence policy. Europe spends two-thirds as much as the US on defence, but gets only a fraction of its ef fectiveness. European nations need to modernise their armed forces for rapid and flexible deployment. Improved EU military capabilities will not be separate from NATO str uctures and would only be deployed where NATO as a whole chooses not to engage. The launch of an EU operation will follow a unanimous decision, with each member state free to decide whether to take part. We support Trident, Britain's minimum nuclear deterrent. The Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty commits us to work for the global elimination of nuclear weapons. We are enthusiastic signatories to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, whose coming into force will impede nuclear proliferation, and we want to see the USA and Russia continue to reduce their nuclear stockpiles. We recognise the new dangers posed by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and the need to combat them. Nuclear arms reductions and proliferation controls remain an important par t of defence and security policy. We will seek ef fective inspections against the development of chemical and biological weapons. We will encourage the US to consult closely with NATO allies on its ideas for missile defence and to pursue a dialogue with Russia on a new framework for strategic arms control that will encourage further cuts in nuclear weapons. The British defence industry is a vital part of our economy, sustaining some 350,000 high technology jobs. We will continue to work closely with our best companies to get the best equipment for our armed forces ­ a good deal for the taxpayer as well as a secure future for high - technology jobs. The UK has introduced the most open

repor t on arms exports of any European nation and has led the EU to adopt a code of conduct on arms sales. Labour will lead ef for ts to control the trade in small arms, and work for a comprehensive action plan at this year's UN conference on small arms, including an International Arms Surrender Fund to provide development aid in exchange for firearms. We will legislate to modernise the regulation of arms exports, with a licensing system to control the activities of ar ms brokers and traffickers wherever they are located. We will work with EU applicant countries to strengthen their capacity to control legal and illicit arms transfers.

The modern world
Britain belongs to a unique range of influential global organisations, giving us responsibilities and opportunities. Labour will stand up for Britain: · at the UN, where we support a more modern and representative Security Council, with more effective peacekeeping · at the Group of 7 leading industrialised countries, where we will stay at the forefront of ef for ts to promote development in the · Commonwealth, where we will work to promote

human rights and bridge the digital divide. We will argue for an early, comprehensive world trade round, to the benefit of industrialised and developing countries alike. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) must be refor med, not rejected. We will support fairer ter ms of trade for developing countries, and a reduction in protectionism in the developed world in areas such as agriculture. We will continue to help developing countries exercise their rights within the WTO. We support the promotion of higher labour standards around the world, as well as respect for the environment, as we expand world trade. The International Labour Or ganisation (ILO) is the place to set labour standards, but we believe there should be closer co-operation between the ILO and the WTO through the creation of a joint standing for um of the two organisations. We are committed to encouraging universal obser vance of human rights. Governments which are democratically elected will be firmer allies for peace; open societies which respect individual freedom will be more reliable trade par tners. Labour will be a friend of those denied human rights and a supporter of steps to strengthen them. Labour has played a leading role in bringing war criminals, notably from former Yugoslavia,

Keeping the peace in Kosovo... Labour is investing in strong, effective and responsive armed forces

39


40

Britain strong in the world

Britain strong in the world

to justice, and in establishing a permanent cour t to try war crimes. We will make the International Criminal Court a reality, with Britain as one of its first members.

International development
In 1997, Labour pledged to give new priority to tackling global poverty. Four years on, there have been real achievements ­ a Cabinet Minister heads an internationally respected depar tment, the aid budget has been substantially raised, and tied aid has been abolished. Britain is playing a leading world role on debt relief, education, HIV/AIDS, and in responding to humanitarian disasters. With strong UK leadership, the international development effort is now increasingly

Promoting human rights... Tony Blair with Nelson Mandela

focused on poverty reduction. This is morally right, but also in our interest. Many of the world's biggest challenges ­ from violent conflict to rapid population growth to environmental threat ­ are caused or exacerbated by global poverty and inequality. There can be no secure future for any of us unless we promote greater global social justice. Labour will continue to focus Britain's development effort on the achievement by 2015 of the International Development Targets ­ including halving the proportion of the world's population living in extreme poverty, reducing child and infant mortality by two-thirds, primary education for all children, and sustainable development plans in every country. With Labour, the aid budget will rise to 0.33 per cent of GNP by 2003-04, reaching £3.6 billion ­ a 45 per cent increase in real terms since 1997 level. We remain committed to the UN target of 0.7 per cent of national income devoted to development and will make fur ther substantial increases over the next Parliament. We remain committed to our Bill, blocked by the Tories, to consolidate our pover ty-focused approach to development. We are using this aid to support political

and economic reform in developing countries. Our aid is an investment to help countries put in place policies to raise the growth rate with greater equity, crack down on corruption, promote human rights, including those for women and girls, and develop effective governance and democracy. We will legislate to toughen controls over UK nationals who commit offences of corruption abroad. Labour will champion increased effectiveness and a stronger focus on poverty reduction within international institutions ­ particularly the EU but also the World Bank, International Monetar y Fund, UN and the Commonwealth ­ with full support for poverty reduction strategies where they genuinely prioritise pover ty reduction. We are committed to international action to put the needs of children at the centre of these strategies. By 2006 we want to raise to 70 per cent the proportion of EU aid going to low-income countries, and work with the Commission, Parliament and other governments to strengthen the EU's development effort. Labour has led internationally on debt relief, providing 100 per cent relief for countries committed to spending the proceeds on pover ty reduction. We will work to help more of the heavily indebted poor countries qualify for debt relief where this benefits the poor. And we will work to prevent new debt burdens through international agreement not to give expor t credits for excessive military spending or prestige projects. Education has a special place for Labour. We will increase further our support for quality primar y education for all, particularly for girls. Our Imfundo project, part of an £800 million education programme, will bring together public and private sector commitment to use IT to ensure effective teacher training and education management. We will give top priority to combating the spread of HIV/AIDS which is inflicting massive human and economic costs across the developing world. We will work for the creation of a global health fund to make essential drugs and commodities more accessible to the poor, focusing on TB, malaria and HIV/AIDS. This will complement our existing support for the development of basic healthcare systems and our new tax credits to incentivise research into the diseases of pover ty by the drug companies. Development goes much wider than aid and debt relief. It is also about how we manage the global economy. Our aim is to shape globalisation so that it works better for the world's poor. Trade is key. But so is private investment. We will promote socially responsible business practice through advisory services on codes of social responsibility, the Ethical Trading Initiative, the Export Credit Guarantee

Depar tment's new code of business principles, the Commonwealth Development Corporation's partnership with the private sector, and our initiatives to encourage private investment in infrastructure. Nowhere will our resolve be more tested than in Africa. Labour is committed to strengthening our partnership for development with Africa. We will work with reforming governments, international institutions, the private sector and civil society in support of nationally owned development strategies. We will also redouble our efforts to prevent and resolve violent conflicts in Africa, using our new Africa conflict fund to provide help for security sector reform, demilitarisation programmes and tighter controls over small arms.

The environmental challenge
The poor make the smallest per capita contribution to climate change, but are often most affected when it happens. We are convinced by the scientific evidence of climate change ­ and convinced that now is the time to act. We need action at local, national and international level if we are to preser ve the stability of our natural environment over the next 50 years. The principle of mutual responsibility that governs our approach to social problems also applies to environmental issues. The healthy future of our environment is one of the world's greatest challenges. We must make substantial changes in the ways we work

and live to safeguard all our futures. The UK played a leading role in the Kyoto conference. The targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions agreed at that conference are a vital first step in the battle against global warming. It is critical that the whole international community plays its part in making a reality of sustainable development. We are determined to play a constructive role at the Rio plus 10 meeting in South Africa next year. We are one of the few countries to have met our 1992 obligations to hold greenhouse gases in 2000 below their 1990 levels. In 1997 we set a target of reducing CO2 emissions by 20 per cent by 2010. We will meet our obligations arising from the Kyoto protocol and have set out a detailed strategy to achieve more ­ a 23 per cent cut in greenhouse gases by 2010. The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution has said the UK will need to cut CO2 production by 60 per cent by 2050, so we need to press ahead with a radical agenda for the development of low-carbon economic growth, embodied in our £700 million commitment to renewable energy. In addition to our proposals for environmental technology and renewable energy (described in `Prosperity for all'), we must also make progress in the following areas: · We must make the market work for the environment. Britain is developing the first national CO2 emissions trading system in the world. It will help companies find the most ef ficient way of reducing emissions ­ and

reward them for doing so. Once the system is established here we will seek to extend it around the world. · We will support fuel cell and hybrid vehicles, which already offer a halving of fuel consumption and CO2 emissions, with cheaper motoring to match ­ and for cleaner fuels and biofuels. By increasing demand for new technologies we can boost innovation and the vitality of the UK car industry. · It is imperative that we use natural resources more efficiently and recycle more. We will continue to tax pollution and reward clean production. We will develop environmental productivity indicators. We have set a target for the recycling of 35 per cent of household waste by 2015 and will work with local authorities to introduce kerbside recycling schemes wherever appropriate. · Water management is a vital challenge for the future ­ for the environment and for the growing world population. · Environmental protection and sustainable development go hand in hand. We cannot protect the environment without addressing the development needs of the poor, and pover ty reduction depends on safeguarding natural resources on which poor people depend. · We will continue to provide leadership abroad, working for international agreement on climate change, improved integration of the environment in European policies and a strong global environment agency built around the cur rent UN Environment Programme. We will

International aid... education has a special place for Labour

work to improve marine and forest conser vation overseas and in the UK.

Britain can be pivotal to world af fairs, using our alliances to advance our interests and values. The key is to use our strengths of history and geography to engage with other countries, not to retreat. That is Labour's promise.

How Labour is strengthening your voice in the world:
· by taking a lead in Europe,

standing up for Britain's rights and reforming Europe to promote jobs and deepen democracy
· by supporting our armed forces,

making sure our troops are always available and effective in times of crisis
· by working to tackle global

climate change, meeting our own tough targets and pushing other countries to meet theirs
· by leading the fight against

global poverty, with increased aid, better spent
Natural resources... Labour is committed to a healthy environment and renewable energy, taxing pollution and rewarding clean production

41


The choices for Scotland
These are our ambitions for Scotland ­ and how they can be achieved. Clear in our values, confident in our policies, we seek a new mandate from the Scottish people. We are proud of our record in government. But we are not yet satisfied. Labour is the party of reform and we fight this election as agents of change in Scotland and the rest of Britain. Change to our economy, so more people share the benefits of growth. Change in our public ser vices, so that they better advance equality of opportunity. Change in our welfare system, so that we extend security, responsibility and independence. Change to tackle crime and its causes. Change to deepen our democracy. Change to Britain's role in the world. The Conservatives were rejected in 1997 because they had failed. The national debt had doubled; one in five households were on benefit; and we were marginalised in Europe. Yet instead of learning, the Conservatives have become more dogmatic, more extreme, more divided. They are worse than ever. The Scottish people now face a choice. New Labour stands in the political mainstream, rooted in the best values of the Scottish people. The Conservatives have veered to extreme positions. This election will decide whether we continue the policies that have brought us economic stability, steady growth, investment in public services and targeted tax cuts for children and families, or whether we lurch back to boom and bust. It will decide whether we stand for a positive engagement with Europe and the wider world, or retreat to the sidelines. And it will decide whether we put our schools, hospitals and police officers first, or put them second after unaf fordable tax cuts. Because £16 billion worth of Tory cuts to public services would mean less money for the Scottish Parliament to invest in Scotland's schools and hospitals, its police and transport system. That is why we need Labour at Westminster and Labour at Holyrood. We want everyone to vote in this election. But before you do, think of your job; think of your mor tgage; think of your school and hospital; think of your children and your parents; think of police and crime prevention; think of the choice of leadership. Think of who you want to succeed in Scotland ­ the many or the few. There is still much to do with new Labour ­ and a lot for you to lose under the Conservatives. The choice is clear: for an ambitious and confident Scotland, the choice is Labour.
42

25 steps to a better Scotland
1 Basic skills for 750,000 people 2 Innovative financing schemes to encourage investment 3 Free off-peak bus travel for pensioners and people with disabilities 4 Raise the minimum wage to £4.20 5 £1,000 tax cut ­ the Children's Tax Credit ­ for parents of newborn children

6 A computer for every five secondary pupils and four for every primary class

7 1,000 extra teachers for Scotland's schools

8 Cut in-patient waiting times, with a maximum waiting time of no more than nine months by 2003

9 The biggest-ever hospital building programme in Scotland's history

10 All Scottish secondary schools to have a sports co-ordinator

11 An `Employment First' interview for everyone coming on to benefits

12 Expanded support for children through tax and benefit reform

13 Extend and increase paid maternity leave and introduce paid paternity leave

14 New Pension Credit for lower- and middleincome pensioners and the Winter Fuel Payment retained

15 A £90 million Better Neighbourhood Fund

16 Extra funding to maintain police recruits at record levels

17 New powers to seize the assets of drug traffickers and other major criminals

18 Scotland's first drug court

19 A bill to protect vulnerable and intimidated witnesses

20 New freedoms, with a duty of Best Value for local government

21 Lead economic reform in Europe

22 Work for the re-start of world trade talks

23 Strong, effective and responsive armed forces

24 Raise international aid towards the UN target

25 Be the first country to introduce greenhouse gas trading to cut pollution


The contract delivered
In the 1997 Labour manifesto,Tony Blair said: `We set out in the manifesto that follows ten commitments, commitments that form our bond of trust with the people. Judge us on them. Have trust in us and we will repay that trust. This is our contract with the people.' This is a summar y of Labour's record since 1997. For more information on Labour's policies, please visit our website at www.scottishlabour.org.uk, or contact your local Labour campaign team.

1. Education will be our number one priority, and we will increase the share of national income spent on education as we decrease it on the bills of economic and social failure The record: We have passed the Standards in Scottish Schools Act, introducing national priorities to raise standards, especially in core skills of literacy and numeracy. This August, there will be no primary one, two or three classes with over 30 children. We have cut the costs of debt and unemployment by nearly £9 billion per year. Education spending across the UK has risen from the 4.7 per cent of national income we inherited to 5 per cent this year (2001-02). 2. There will be no increase in the basic or top rates on income tax The record: We cut the basic rate of income tax to 22p in April 2000 and introduced the 10p band in April 1999. There has been no increase in the top rate of income tax. The direct tax burden on a single earner family on average earnings with two children is the lowest since 1972. 3. We will provide stable economic growth with low inflation, and promote dynamic and competitive business and industry at home and abroad The record: Net borrowing in every year from 1997 to 2003-04 is forecast to be lower than in any Tory year, from 1992-93 to 1996-97. Inflation has been consistently under control and on target. Economic growth has been steady, averaging 2.75 per cent a year since 1997. Living standards are on average about 10 per cent higher in real terms than in 1997. 4. We will get 25,000 young Scots off benefit and into work The record: Some 32,600 Scots have been helped into work by Labour's New Deal. There are 97,000 more Scots in work than in 1997; unemployment is at its lowest level for 25 years in Scotland.

5. We will rebuild the NHS, reducing spending on administration and increasing spending on patient care The record: The next three years will see record spending on the NHS and the biggest-ever hospital building programme. We have streamlined bureaucracy and abolished the internal market, releasing resources to treat more patients. Waiting lists and waiting times are falling. Eight out of ten patients are treated within three months, with 100,000 more operations than in 1997. 6. We will be tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime The record: Overall crime in Scotland, as measured by the Scottish Crime Survey, is at its lowest level for 20 years. Scotland's police forces are officially at record strength. There are now 15,149 officers in Scotland, more than ever before ­ up 365 since the Scottish Parliament was set up. We have set up the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and, over the next three years, we will commit an extra £100 million to dealing with drugs. We have banned all handguns. 7. We will help build strong families and strong communities, and lay the foundations of a modern welfare state in pensions and community care The record: Child benefit has been raised by over 25 per cent for the first child. The Children's Tax Credit is worth up to £520 a year. We have introduced parental leave and rights to holidays. We are extending maternity leave. £4.5 billion extra is being spent this year in real terms on pensioners. The basic state pension will rise to £75.50 for single pensioners and £120.70 for pensioner couples next year, and the Minimum Income Guarantee is helping over 1.6 million of the poorest pensioners. TV licence fees have been abolished for the over-75s, with free access to national museums and galleries for children and pensioners.

8. We will safeguard our environment, and develop an integrated transport policy to fight congestion and pollution The record: We are making record investment in transpor t, which will increase by 45 per cent over the next three years. We have maintained and invested in our trunk road system, including five major new constructions and a package worth £444 million to improve and repair Scotland's road network, an increase of 22 per cent on the previous two years. We have also invested in safety, particularly for children, with over £5 million to implement Safer Routes to School throughout Scotland. Public transport has been revitalised with Labour, with £200 million in subsidies for Scotland's rail services and £150 million for our Public Transport Fund. We have invested in bus travel and overseen the first rise in bus use in 13 years. Further funds have been allocated for the Freight Facilities Grant to get 18 million lorry miles off the roads by 2002. 9. We will clean up politics, decentralise political power and establish a Scottish Parliament The record: The funding of political parties, campaign expenditure and conduct of referendums is regulated. For the first time the UK has a Freedom of Information Act. The Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly and Nor thern Ireland Assembly are now up and running, while local democracy has been returned to the people of London. The first stage of reform of the House of Lords has reduced the number of Hereditary Peers to less than 100. 10. We will give Britain the leadership in Europe which Britain and Europe need The record: Labour has negotiated successfully for Britain in Europe. Our rebate is protected, enlargement is being taken forward. We have led the debate on European economic reform, on the development of a European defence capacity rooted in NATO structures. In Kosovo our armed forces played a leading role in standing up against ethnic cleansing.

44


