Published by order of the National Executive 
Third Way General Election Manifesto 2005    
May 2005 ISBN 0954478843     
Third Way Publications 
Index 
*  Introduction 
*  1/ A Patriotic Centre Party 
*  2/ For Direct Democracy along Swiss lines 
*  3/ Decision-Making at the lowest possible level 
*  4/ For Widespread Ownership of Property 
*  5/ Debt free finance 
*  6/ Policy Snapshots 
*  I. Health service 
*  II. Education 
*  III. Crime 
*  IV. Workers/Employees rights 
*  V. Aid for Developing Countries 
*  VI. The Environment 
*  VII. Terrorism 
*  VIII. Immigration/Asylum 
*  IX. Transport 
*  X. Europe 
*  XI. Iraq 
Introduction 
Third Way is a Patriotic Centre party rooted in the culture and traditions of these 
islands. We advocate Direct Democracy along Swiss lines using referenda and 
citizens' initiatives. We support small business and co-operative ownership. Third 
Way opposes over-centralised government and promotes decision making at the 
lowest practical level. 
1. A Patriotic Centre Party 
The Third Way rejects the straitjacket of left and right, and looks to go beyond such 
outdated and sterile concepts. We believe that there is often an alternative view to 
many issues that are held by partisans of left or right. Hence our name. 
We also accept however that a so-called left or right wing position might be the most 
appropriate one, on a particular issue, at a particular time. That does not mean that 
this will be so on other matters, therefore the best party is one that offers left, right 
and third way solutions as is appropriate, and is most beneficial for the people. The 
phrase that accurately captures the essence of our party is the 'Patriotic Centre'. At 
the centre of UK politics but also patriotic because unlike other centre parties (such 
as the Lib Dems) we want to preserve our national independence. 
2. For Direct Democracy along Swiss lines 
The Third Way advocates Direct Democracy along Swiss lines. We support the 
introduction of three mechanisms of Direct Democracy: Referendums, Initiative and 
Recall. 
Direct democracy was introduced at federal level in Switzerland in 1848, although 
in some Swiss cantons forms of direct democracy have been used since the 
fourteenth century. A variety of direct democracy mechanisms are provided for at 
both federal and cantonal level, with Swiss voters given the chance to cast their 
votes in federal ballots on average four times a year. Between 1848 and February 
2004, 517 referendums were held, whilst between 1892 and May 2004, 244 initiatives 
were proposed 
At Federal (or national level) the people of Switzerland have access to two 
important mechanisms - referendum and initiative. 
Referendums 
Unlike in other countries, in Switzerland it is not the government that decides if a 
referendum is held on an issue; the circumstances under which referendums are 
used are clearly prescribed within the country's constitution. 
The first type of direct democracy mechanism is the mandatory referendum, i.e., a 
referendum that the government must call in relation to certain important political 
issues. These concern constitutional changes or the signing of treaties or joining of 
organisations which might affect the Swiss policy of neutrality. 
Optional referendums can be held in relation to new or amended federal acts and/or 
international treaties. The optional legislative referendum is held in relation to all 
federal laws and urgent federal laws that are due to be valid for more than a year. 
The optional referendum on international treaties is held in relation to international 
treaties that are of unlimited duration and may not be terminated, and international 
treaties that provide for membership of international organisations or contain 
legislative provisions that have to be implemented by enacting federal laws. 
Optional referendums are called if 50,000 signatures are collected in support of a 
referendum within 100 days, or if eight cantons request a referendum, and pass with 
a popular majority. Until 2004, an optional referendum has never been successfully 
requested by a group of cantons; the first referendum initiated by the cantons was 
held on 16 May 2004. 
Initiatives 
Initiatives can be used to propose changes to the federal constitution. In addition, in 
2003 Switzerland adopted a new form of initiative, to be used in relation with more 
general statutory provisions. Once filed, a specified number of valid signatures (i.e. 
signatures of registered voters) are required in order to force the Federal Council 
and Parliament to consider the initiative and to hold a referendum on its proposal. 
Amendments to the constitution can be proposed using two different initiative 
mechanisms. The popular initiative for a partial revision of the constitution provides 
voters with the opportunity to propose a draft revision to part of the federal 
constitution. 100,000 voters must sign an initiative in order for a referendum to be 
held on the proposal. The popular initiative for a total revision of the constitution 
also requires the support of 100,000 voters in an initiative. In both cases, the 
signatures must be collected within 18 months of the initiative being filed. 
From late 2006, the general popular initiative will be available to Swiss voters. This 
mechanism can be used to force a referendum on the adoption of a general proposal 
that will be incorporated on a constitutional and/or legislative level, providing that 
100,000 signatures are collected in support of the initiative. 
We in Third Way favour the adoption of a similar system in our country. We 
propose: 
*  The right of the people to initiate legislation. 5% of voters should, by petition, be 
able to compel the holding of a binding poll on whether a proposed law of their own 
choosing should be adopted, or whether a particular law already in force should be 
repealed or replaced. 
*  The right of the people to petition for a referendum concerning a Bill which has 
passed through our representative institutions in the normal way, but has not yet 
taken effect. A valid petition of 5% of the electorate (nationally or locally) should be 
enough to compel a referendum on the proposed measure before it is implemented. 
*  The right of the people to petition for the holding of an election on the recall, or 
removal from public officials who have (for example) been corrupt or incompetent 
in office, or broken their word to the people who elected them. 
Recall 
The recall mechanism is the least common of the three direct democracy 
mechanisms. Although many US states include provision for the recall in their 
constitutions, the mechanism is not used at national level. Provision for the recall 
mechanism outside the US and at national level is rare, even in countries where 
direct democracy is widely used (like Switzerland). Only in Venezuela does the 
recall mechanism apply to a country's elected head of state. However, in most US 
states, the recall mechanism can be used to recall all elected state officials, from 
local and county officials up to the office of Governor. Judges may also be the 
subject of recall campaigns. In some states, some non-elected officials such as 
administrative officers can also be recalled. 
The number of signatures required in order to hold a recall ballot is important. The 
fewer the number of signatures required, the more likely it is that a vote on whether 
an officer should be recalled will take place. At the 2003 California recall, recall 
proponents were required to gather signatures of 12% of the vote for Governor at 
the last election in a period of 160 days. Many other US states require 25% of voters 
to support a recall; California's threshold of 12% is the lowest in the States. 
Third Way favours recall at all levels of government and a low threshold of 12% in 
a period of 160 days. 
Direct Democracy represents a higher level of democracy, for in addition to the 
choice of representatives, it also institutionalises the voters' right to decide for 
themselves on many issues. It not only requires governments to hold referendums as 
a regular and normal part of the democratic process, but in addition it allows for 
private citizens to demand a referendum on any matter of their choice, provided 
that they can raise enough signatures in their support. Direct Democracy can 
operate both at the level of the national government and at local council level. Recall 
would make elected representatives more responsive to public attitudes. 
Implementation of these measures would address part of the 'democratic deficit' in 
our country. 
3. Decision-Making at the lowest possible level 
We support community and district councils with greater powers. We want electoral 
reform for local government, with the introduction of proportional representation 
at local level (as is already planned for Scotland) as well as national. 
We oppose unelected Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) The electorate alone 
should determine the exact form and boundaries of regional government on a region 
by region basis. The Scottish Parliament and Welsh and Ulster Assemblies should 
have greater powers including levels of taxation. We favour calls for a referendum 
on the establishment of an English Parliament and Independence for Ulster. 
We want a Constitutional Commission established to draft proposals for a fully 
elected second chamber (the current House of Lords) and specifically to examine the 
potential of constituencies based on workplaces. 
4. For Widespread Ownership of Property 
Third Way believes that the widespread ownership of property produces political 
stability, social cohesion, and greater freedom of action for individuals and 
communities. This means people having a greater degree of involvement in the 
ownership and control of the places where they work. 
If we are interested in inclusion and empowerment we must move to support co-
operative ownership, the self-employed and workers trusts. This is real 
stakeholding. Workers/employees know the business inside out and are neglected as 
a source of creative ideas and solutions. Not only is it morally wrong for them to 
have no decision making powers it is inefficient. 
We favour the introduction of a Co-operative Act and the reform of the Companies 
Act. 
A new Co-operative Act 
Third Way favours the encouragement of co-operative ownership. We want: 
*  A Co-operative Act to enshrine co-ops in our legal system, as an alternative form 
of ownership and control. 
*  Investment from State funds to encourage co-operative development (as in Italy 
under the Marcora Law of 1985). These funds would be issued as part of the debt-
free funding of public projects (as explained later). 
*  Community initiatives backed by state funding to train the unemployed in the 
skills they require to form co-ops and to provide them with investment capital. 
Reform of the Companies Act 
Third Way favours reform of the Companies Act to allow: 
*  Employees in designated large companies to be made members of the companies 
in which they work through trust funds set up on their behalf, allowing them to 
exercise their individual right to vote according to the number of shares their 
interest in the trust fund represents. 
*  That company general meetings include employee representatives. 
*  That workers are able to petition for a binding vote to turn designated large 
companies into a co-operative after a fixed period of existence. 
Supporting Small Businesses 
Third Way supports the small businessman and woman. We oppose the destruction 
of local shopping areas, the unnecessary burdens of red-tape and unfair 
competition. We would like to reverse the norm of out-of-town shopping centres, 
and would like to return the High Street to its historic role as a focal point for the 
local community. 
We want government to: 
*  Streamline regulations 
*  Reduce the number of taxes on small/ owner managed businesses 
*  Improve the tax environment to encourage development of personal working 
skills 
*  Reduce the overall tax burden on small/ owner managed businesses 
*  Increase tax incentives to improve level of savings for retirement 
*  Make company costs incurred in achieving compliance with Government 
regulations tax deductible (e.g.: PAYE, NI, tax credits, Health and Safety, Disability 
Discrimination Act) at the 150% rate 
*  Revise the IR35 rulings ('consultant taxed as employee') 
*  Increase Tax Allowance for employer accreditation (e.g.: ISO 9001, Investors in 
People) 
*  Legislate (not simply compile a register of late payers) to curtail late payment by 
big firms 
To combat red tape we want government to: 
*  Introduce sunset clauses, so new regulations automatically lapse if they are not 
considered worth renewing 
*  Introduce standard commencement dates for new and revised regulations 
*  Reduce conflicts/ contradictions between Government legislation/ paperwork 
*  Announce legislation AT LEAST a minimum of six months before it could come 
into effect 
We believe that transport and planning policies should be geared to providing each 
local area with a heart, with social spaces alongside shops and businesses. 
Legislation affecting small business should be reviewed and simplified, such that 
small-scale enterprise might again become an important basis of the economy. We 
want greater small business representation and input in the process of decision 
making - at present the consultation process on employment and social laws is 
dominated by trade unions and big business with the voice of small businesses often 
going unheard. 
5. Debt free finance 
For public projects and services, 3W favours the issue of debt-free money by the 
State instead of borrowing (at interest) by the State from private financial 
institutions. This would allow for a massive reduction in taxes. The private banking 
system presently lends around ten times as much as it actually has (it's called the 
gearing ratio) but claims repayment with interest on all of its loans, not just those 
backed by already existing assets. This is a basic cause of inflation, as well as being a 
highly dubious practice and effectively a privatised form of taxation; and is the 
reason why the present system cannot ever cure inflation, only play with its 
symptoms at our expense - cutting services, asset-stripping the country, yet never 
being able to clear the debt. The current system effectively steals purchasing power 
from the individuals and levies a banker's tax on business and government 
investment. We consider this an unacceptable situation, and would seek to change it. 
A Citizens' or basic income 
We recognise that it is not simply the actions of 'individual entrepreneurs' which 
lead to modern industry being as productive as it is. There is a Cultural Heritage; 
the skills, inventions and developed systems handed down by previous generations 
that enable this. Not only does the present system steal purchasing power but also 
robs people of their birthright. 
Third Way advocates a shift to Citizens' Income for all, instead of the present 
complex, often anomalous and expensive to administer mess of benefits. Citizens 
Income (sometimes called "Basic Income") is a sum, the same for all, payable 
through the State as an inalienable right to all citizens of the country, throughout 
their lives and sufficient to at least meet the cost of their basic needs. It is true 
"stakeholding" in the society and its economy. There would of course be some 
additional provision to cover exceptional needs or contingencies. 
Citizens' Income will be financed through the elimination of benefits and allowances 
and through a National Bank using the creation of credit through gearing. 
6. Policy Snapshots 
The Third Way has developed policies on a huge range of issues confronting our 
country. It's not possible in this short Manifesto to detail them all. To give an idea of 
our range and depth of ideas we present in the following pages a snapshot of specific 
policy areas. 
Health service 
Our first duty is to the ill. Our health service - though imperfect - can be a role 
model for other countries. 
We want an integrated health service with counseling, GPs and dentists provided at 
one location. 
We support a much greater role for preventative medicine. We advocate legislation 
to limit the amount of sugar, fat and additives pumped into our foods. Public 
institutions such as schools and prisons must be required to provide healthy meals. 
Education 
Third Way has looked at the option of ending compulsory external examination at 
16. 
We considered proposing that schools should be able to issue a standard certificate 
of education for those leaving at this age. At age 14 students could choose either a 
technical course (similar to the Czech system) or to study towards an International 
Baccalaureate Diploma at age 16-19. 
We recognise, however, the broad support for the proposed reforms outlined in the 
Tomlinson Report. Therefore, on balance, we see these as a more workable option 
and call for their immediate introduction. 
Briefly summarised these would: 
*  Replace GCSEs, A-levels and vocational qualifications with a new single diploma 
over a 10-year period of reform. 
*  Slash the number of exams pupils have to take. 
*  Replace all coursework with a single extended project. Some hands-on courses, 
such as art and design, would still have project-based work, but this would be done 
in school - rather than independently - to reduce cheating. Cheats would also be 
weeded out when they had to sit an oral exam. 
*  Create a diploma at four levels: entry (equivalent to pre-GCSEs), foundation 
(GCSEs at grade D-G), intermediate (GCSE A*-C) and advanced (A-level). 
*  Enable students to progress at their own rate, paving the way for mixed-aged 
classes. 
*  Allow Advanced-level students to sit extra hard questions to get even higher 
marks than are currently available under the A-level system thus adding extra 
"stretch". These would be introduced to A-levels as A-plus and A-double plus 
before the diploma was introduced. 
*  The diploma would be made up of the modules, which would be adapted from the 
existing A-level and GCSE modules. 
*  Let students pick their own combination (open diploma) or opt for one of the 20 
pre-designed combinations (specialised diploma). This should give stronger and 
more respected vocational qualifications. 
*  Introduce a new "core" which all pupils would have to do to pass the diploma, 
made up of: "functional" - maths, ICT and communication skills, an extended 
essay, and "wider activities" - work experience, paid jobs, voluntary work and 
family responsibilities. 
*  Give "Graduates" of the diploma a transcript of their achievements, including a 
breakdown of individual module marks, which would be available to employers and 
universities online. 
We will abolish tuition fees and direct money saved from the reform of secondary 
education (high exam costs and bureaucracy) towards higher education. Our basic 
or Citizens' Income will remove any need for a maintenance grant. 
We support Learner Reps in the workplace and would develop this intensively. We 
welcome what New Labour has done in this area. 
We support the introduction of National Civic Service for those leaving full-time 
education. We don't see this as military service but service of benefit to the 
community either here or if so desired overseas. 
Crime 
Young people are more likely to be the victims of street crime - more likely to be the 
perpetrators. Why? What drives the criminals - drug dependence; racism; avarice; 
amorality? What is it about the society we live in, the communities we have 
constructed, that has created so much violence - and beyond that violence a deep 
sense of fear? 
The more connections we have with our neighbours the less likely we are to attack 
them - if there is a consequence of that violence both in terms of the effect upon and 
between attacker and victim and attacker and the rest of the community; where 
each individual is valued but also the community's well being is valued. 
We would create communities where people are far less likely to turn to crime but 
we also have policies to tackle criminals directly. 
We will make the principle of "restorative justice" the centre of our Justice system. 
Any offender will be required to make amends. Reparation will either be directly to 
the victim, or in service or payment to the community. We will make it the norm for 
victims of crime to speak after judgement and before sentencing for their views to 
be taken into account. For less serious crimes the Prosecution Service might use its 
discretion not to prosecute if adequate compensation had been agreed or to suspend 
prosecution conditionally on the offenders carrying out agreed reparation. 
We believe that our Prison Service is a mess. Many of those who are in prison would 
be better treated for mental health problems or drug addiction. Our aim would be 
to reduce the prison population dramatically with only those representing a real 
danger to our community being sent there. This would mainly consist of violent 
offenders who showed no remorse and a repeated pattern of behaviour. We would 
put greater emphasis on providing special units for drug rehabilitation and/or 
mental health. 
The war on hard drugs has been lost. A general corruption has permeated society, 
inadvertently facilitated through law enforcement which effectively gifts organised 
crime a monopoly on the extremely lucrative trade in hard drugs. For various 
reasons, some of them dubious, governments have failed to review their policies in 
the face of increasing evidence of failure. Third Way believes that we cannot 
realistically hope to eliminate hard drugs from our society; the best we can do is 
control their supply. Heroin and cocaine should be made available on prescription, 
free to those who register and attend counseling. If doctors are unprepared for 
ethical or other reasons to prescribe such drugs, then special State-run centres 
should be set up to administer their distribution. This is not an endorsement of 
drug-culture; it is a realistic attempt at damage limitation and prevention. 
For ordinary citizens a major benefit is that they will be shielded from the present 
negative consequences of others' drug abuse. Drug gangs will have their market 
taken away from them, and as drug-related crime will be virtually eliminated, the 
amount of Police resources freed will be enormous. The cost of supplying 
maintenance doses to addicts is minuscule compared with the cost of combating an 
ever-rising level of drug related crime by orthodox methods. Although many of the 
professionals in relevant fields have revised their views, senior politicians have not 
yet accepted these arguments. As the situation worsens economic pressures may 
eventually persuade them. 
Our Police service needs reform. We call for the direct election of Police authorities 
and the establishment of a genuinely independent Police Complaints Authority. The 
harshest sentences will be meted out to Police who acted unjustly or corruptly. We 
will expand the numbers of Special Constables dramatically and increase resources 
for their training and payment. The number of Community Policemen and 
Policewomen will be greatly increased. 
Third Way favours joint initiatives with industry to design out crime. We recognise 
that changes in housing design, urban development and product design can 
eliminate many possible crimes. We will establish a Crime Prevention Ministry 
tasked to manage these relations and look for ways to reduce crime through both 
social change and design initiatives. 
Workers/Employees rights 
Third Way defends and seeks to extend workers' rights. We uphold the right to join 
a Trade Union, to obtain Union representation and to take industrial action. 
Aid for Developing Countries 
3W wants a world based on Justice. 
Aid in itself may alleviate suffering but it will not resolve the basic problem. We 
must aim to create 'Sustainable' economies. 
*  We want debt cancellation to prevent aid dollars being siphoned out of the 
economy by banks and Western governments. 
*  Aid should be targeted at self-funding schemes. Aid should be targeted to specific 
schemes to prevent it being siphoned off into the hands of corrupt officials. 
*  3W wants fair trade where developing countries and producers are paid just 
prices. 
*  Those young people enrolled in our proposed National Civic Service would be 
able to serve abroad in developing countries. 
The Environment 
3W is a Green party. 
We support the concept that 'Small is Beautiful' and will encourage ecological 
farming in small free-range units. We will ban live export and minimise the internal 
live transport of farm animals and improve market and slaughterhouse conditions. 
All forms of intensive farming, including fish farms will be phased out. We will also 
prohibit the import of any animal commodities produced by methods, which do not 
meet our high UK standards. 
Third Way favours tax and grant incentives to promote the use of renewable energy 
sources. We want funding for research and development for renewable energy 
resources on a huge scale. Every planning or housing development will be required 
to produce an 'environmental audit' indicating how they have incorporated the use 
of renewable energy and energy efficiency into their plans before permission is 
granted. We want to phase out the use of nuclear power, 
We reject the present consumerist lifestyle and mindset. We will seek to educate and 
persuade people into adopting lifestyles based on conservation of resources and 
living in harmony with nature. This ethos would be reflected in every aspect of a 
future Third Way government. 
The problem of global warming can only be tackled by a whole series of changes 
starting at a personal level and moving up through all levels of government and 
industry. Examples of the kind of changes we envisage are: a huge shift towards the 
use of public transport; a move away from air travel; introducing real punitive 
taxation for industrial emissions not meeting strict standards. 
The greatest local threat however to our 'Green and Pleasant land' is the 
Government's threatened 'concreting' over of much of the SouthEast of England for 
housing. 
Terrorism 
Terrorism cannot be justified as it seeks to force a change of government or policy 
through fear rather than persuasion. New Labour, however, is seeking to take away 
our hard fought for rights using the fight against terrorism as an excuse. We don't 
want a country where anyone can be locked-up without a fair trial. We don't want a 
'Big Brother' State. Those advocating such measures are amoral and are betraying 
everything this country stands for. 
The terrorist threat is largely of the Government's own making. They've followed a 
flawed foreign policy based on subservience to the United States. We support the 
Palestinians aim of nationhood (within the context of a two-state solution to the 
Israel/Palestine question) and feel that we need to start a fresh relationship with the 
Arab and Muslim world. 
Immigration/Asylum 
Mass immigration can create social instability. It can bolster existing cultural 
ghettos and heighten tensions over language, customs and the division of resources. 
This can lead to a rise in the evils of racism and ethnic conflict. 
None of us want that. We need a select and limited number of people to come and 
work here (beyond those with family connections) and contribute to our society on 
every level.The immigration system must be both selective and non-racist. 
Guest workers should be welcomed to fill in gaps within the country's 
infrastructure. This will allow such workers to benefit financially without the 
accusation of being used as cheap labour. They will be offered the opportunity to 
apply for citizenship after a fixed period if they so desire. 
Those seeking political asylum must be welcomed. It is an honour for our country to 
provide a haven for those fleeing persecution. Those who are really economic 
migrants should be considered under the normal immigration/guest worker system. 
We believe that mass immigration/economic migration is directly connected to 
global poverty and political instability and would therefore support 'sustainable' 
economic aid and follow an 'ethical' foreign policy that would help limit large 
population movements. 
Transport 
The motorcar has been a liberating force for many working families since the 1950s. 
We oppose the use of speed cameras and parking tickets as a means of raising 
revenue. 
There is however a problem with congestion within many towns and cities. The 
answer is not to introduce more restrictions upon the motorist but rather to 
encourage the use of alternative methods of transport, such as bus or rail, by 
making them cheaper and more economic. 
We want the Railway system re-nationalised and favour massive investment in our 
railway infrastructure. 
Europe 
Third Way is opposed to plans to turn the EU into a centralised superstate with 
inappropriate economic policies being imposed upon its constituent regions by the 
EuroCentral bank. We are not against Britain's continued membership of the EU 
provided it allows for genuine socio-economic diversity of systems and insofar as is 
practical operates on a voluntary basis. 
The EuroCentral Bank with its single currency represents a vastly bigger, and 
external, manifestation of an already existing problem. We deplore the abdication 
by New Labour of what little control (setting of interest rates) the government of 
Britain had over the Bank of England, itself a neo-private and secretive quango. 
Taking politics out of central economics in that fashion near enough terminates 
serious politics, and any pretence of democracy. The democratic concept of the 
electorate being offered a significant choice between differing economic and 
therefore social policies is made meaningless if real control has been transferred 
elsewhere before the discussion even begins. Contrary to the belief of the major 
parties, the economy should be the servant of the population, not its unaccountable 
master. A comparatively localised entity like the Bank of England could certainly be 
reformed, but it is highly improbable that a remote EuroCentral Bank playing 
divide-and-rule with an entire continent ever could. 
It is a matter for regret and an indictment of the past and present regimes in Britain 
that some of the EU's more enlightened initiatives have had to be externally 
formulated rather than instigated in the normal course of government at 
Westminster. Third Way would, however, also look to Britain forming a new non-
aligned international confederation of democratic countries to safeguard against 
future excesses by the EU and the USA, or by globalist corporate-backed interests, 
and for collaboration as equals in joint projects and research, including defence, 
environmentally sound technologies and a well funded long-term space program. 
Potential partners could include Russia, India, Iceland and New Zealand. 
We oppose the loss of the pound or the adoption of the European Constitution since 
they are designed to weaken the exercise of national sovereignty and hasten greater 
'European political union'. 
We do not oppose a close trading or diplomatic relationship with our European 
neighbours but would support a looser confederation than presently offered by the 
EU. If the latter would not be prepared to accept that form of relationship we would 
put our continued membership of the EU to a referendum. 
Iraq 
We opposed the UK's military involvement in Iraq. 
The US was largely motivated by greed for oil. The 'New World Order' is a cover 
for protecting US/Corporate interests throughout the world. The UK government is 
wrong therefore to commit our army to this foreign adventure at great cost in lives 
and money. The result has created more not fewer terrorists. Tony Blair has blood 
on his hands. 
We call for the immediate withdrawal of UK troops and an end to foreign 
occupation in Iraq. 
Join Third Way and help make these policies a reality. 
  

E-MAIL THIS LINK ... Enter recipient's e-mail:  

 
  
 
 

