The Peace Party - Non-violence, Justice, Environment 
  
General Statement of Vision, Views and Policies, 2005 
   
a. Introduction 
  
Our philosophy is based unequivocally on a celebration of life, of concern and respect for every 
person.  Our aim is to feel compassion for all people. 
  
We will never kill (or ask another to kill) or cause pain and suffering to any other for any reason 
whatsoever. 
  
We apply this thinking to all areas of policy - we are not a single issue pressure group.  
Supporters of the Peace Party believe that the world needs 
  
Non-violence  
Co-operation  
Justice for everyone and their environment. 
  
The Party, in government, would support no more wars, or preparations for them.  This would 
currently allow around £37 billion each year to be re-allocated to all kinds of socially useful work - 
eliminating poverty, delivering peace, promoting health and education, improving the environment 
and so on.  The detail follows in this manifesto. 
  
War is destructive to humanity and a morally unacceptable way to resolve conflict.  Killing people 
must never play a part in government policy - The Peace Party renounces war entirely.  It does 
not support any kind of war for whatever reason.  It is determined to work for the removal of all 
causes of war.  It knows that it is time to break the war habit and to move beyond the use of 
physical, and other forms of, violence. 
  
b. Peace means real Hope for the Future 
  
1. Peace is about activity; it is a process, a set of procedures that imply unequivocal care and 
concern, selfless compassion and respect for all humanity.  There can be no real peace without 
truth, trust, toleration and justice. 
  
2. Peace is about social and economic justice and social equity. 
  
3. Peace is a myriad of webs of communication that link us all creating real security and 
strengthening bonds between people and within each one of us.  In today's world we can be in 
touch with any other instantaneously. 
  
4. Peace needs constant work and effort.  The flows of energy create a force stronger than any 
weapon. 
  
5. Peaceful communication is positive, co-operative, constructive and life-enhancing. 
  
6. Peace is belonging.  Peace is community. Peace is harmony.  Peace is solidarity.  Peace is 
cultivating virtues of compassion, kindness and consideration for others. 
  
7. Peace is security where people can define and answer their own needs, where they live, free 
from exploitation, violence and persecution.  Security comes from within - from within individuals 
and from the places where they live. 
  
8. Peace is recognising, when things go wrong, the cycle of violence and how to break out of it; it 
means resolving differences and conflict by non-violent means (peace-making and peace-
building) - finding a common interest, a unity of purpose by listening and talking, mediation, 
negotiation, arbitration, conciliation and reconciliation. 
  
9. Peace is about the full development of all of humanity and the acknowledgement of all human 
rights. 
  
10. Peace is not just absence of violence, terrorism and war. 
  
11. Peace is about the right relationship with our environment, a relationship that is holistic and 
organic. 
  
12. Peace brings rewards for all for, only with peace, can everybody win. 
  
13. Peace has also been shown to be extremely cost effective by several orders of magnitude 
than meeting violence with violence. 
   
c. All people need policies for Real Peace 
  
Our government needs to pass laws to 
  
1. Close down all the military, abolishing the standing armed forces and the military-industrial 
complex. 
  
2. Take out of use and destroy all weapons stockpiled for military purposes and thus allow the 
reallocation of at least £37 billion each year (£32 billion - Ministry of "Defence", £1.5 Billion - 
Foreign Office, £4.5 billion - International Development) (£0.1 billion is, however, used for 
Conflict Prevention) to all kinds of socially useful work such as eliminating poverty, delivering 
peace, promoting health and education and improving the environment; 
  
3. Withdraw immediately from all military alliances and from all current military commitments (in 
Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere) - the UK will never take part in any war again.  We will thus 
greatly reduce, and probably eliminate, the chances of our being considered a target for 
terrorism; 
  
4. Close all armaments factories and research facilities and subsidise their conversion to peaceful 
purposes - peaceful production can bring an end to war; 
  
5. Stop the arms trade: ban all trade in any type of weapon or military equipment. 
  
6. Establish and maintain a multi-skilled, non-violent, highly-trained "Sea-Air-Land Disasters 
Emergency Force", based on the coastguard, fire and ambulance services, to help deal with 
national and international emergencies. 
  
7. Educate individuals and groups, children and adults, to act rationally at times of conflict and 
thus to know how to build trust and self-empowerment, to use conflict prevention and all forms of 
non-violent conflict resolution - mediation, negotiation, conciliation, arbitration and reconciliation 
or, as a last resort, passive resistance, civil disobedience, conscientious objection and non-violent 
direct action. 
  
8 Ensure that children as well as adults learn about peace, disarmament and human rights and 
that they are able to practise peace skills in a non-violent, co-operative atmosphere. 
  
9. Subsidise only those youth organizations that promote peace (e.g. Woodcraft Folk). 
  
10. Set up a Ministry for Peace as part of a government orientated towards peace. 
  
11. Adopt a democratic peace constitution for the European Union. 
  
12. Strengthen our commitment to democratized peace-building organizations including the 
United Nations and its agencies, the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe - for 
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation. 
  
13. Strengthen our commitment to the World Criminal Court. 
  
14. Set up a world-wide disputes settlement service within the United Nations. 
   
d. All People need policies for Social Justice and an Open Society 
  
Our government needs to pass laws to 
  
1. End all forms of slavery - exploitation of some people continues to exist in our country today. 
  
2. Ensure that all people, including the young, are able to work to earn sufficient for their personal 
needs, subject, of course, to age, special social circumstances and physical or mental infirmity. 
  
3. Support co-operative systems of employment, i.e. systems that are democratic, involving 
everyone in the control of the workplace including those workplaces operated by government and 
local authorities. 
  
4. Eliminate poverty and inequality.  Simplify the benefit and pension systems at a stroke by 
ensuring that each adult has a minimum income of £300 per week.  (By the early 1990's 30% of 
children were living below the poverty line in Britain and the gap between incomes for rich and 
poor widened inexorably). 
  
5. Introduce higher rates of taxation for those on incomes over £100,000 per year. 
  
6. Make all tax, for fairness to everyone, income, wealth or corporate.  (We note that, for 
example, VAT hits those on lower incomes proportionately harder than those on higher incomes). 
  
7. Pay for local services ONLY from central funds thus abolishing the unfair Council Tax. 
  
8. Work urgently through the United Nations to eliminate poverty and inequality elsewhere in the 
world AND THEN allow unrestricted movement of people throughout the world so that they may 
live and work where they like - and marry, or live with, whom they like. 
  
9. Ensure that society is completely open and inclusive - that no one is excluded from it for any 
reason.  On so doing, everyone will feel more secure. 
  
10. Ensure that children and young people are treated as equals. 
  
11. Work urgently through the United Nations to establish bodies to manage globalization.  
Everything cannot be left to the "self-regulating" market - such a market does so much to 
promote insecurity. 
  
12. Work to reform the United Nations e.g.  
Abolish the controversial human rights commission,  
Enlarge the Security Council from 15 to 24 seats,  
Tighten oversight of the UN's contracts and sanctions programmes, 
Create a new peace-building body to strengthen civil society in countries ravaged by conflict. 
  
13. Work for democratic world government and the rights of local groups of people to govern 
themselves. 
  
14. Ensure that all people have good housing at a price they can afford.  Our children need a 
good home environment in which to grow up. 
  
15. Liberate land for building houses to ensure that everyone benefits from the wealth tied up in 
land. 
  
16. Guarantee the promotion of a healthy life-style and good health for everyone.  Medical, 
psychological and emotional care must be free to all with the best facilities available to all, for 
when ill-health strikes it is often the poor, dispirited and exhausted that can suffer most. 
  
17. Guarantee that only drugs tested on people will be recognized and marketed; there must be 
no more testing on animals. 
  
18. Make sure that all education is available to everyone - without cost.  Non-means-tested grants 
will cover all costs of those needing to live away from home - for travel, lodging and subsistence.  
Promote apprenticeship schemes to help the young especially into work. 
  
19. Ensure that good sports and leisure facilities are available to all and that they are accessible 
by subsidized (i.e. free) public transport for the young. 
  
20. Ensure that everyone is potentially able to take part in decision-making with voting in all 
elections by proportional representation (for example, by single transferable vote in multi-member 
constituencies as in Northern Ireland). 
  
21. Ensure that the UK has a sufficient supply of its own doctors, teachers and other skilled 
workers - trained ones must NOT be drawn away from poorer, developing countries thus 
hindering or stunting their growth. 
  
22. Work towards the de-criminalisation of all drugs, acknowledging that all of them, including 
tobacco and alcohol, are noxious, life-threatening substances and recognizing that making drugs 
illegal has failed to stop abuse and has lead to the increase of crime and poverty. 
  
23. Ensure that the UN is able to work with governments locally to protect indigenous peoples 
and 
  
24. Subsidise purchases from these peoples. 
  
25. Ensure that the social climate is so supportive that every mother-to-be will feel that she and 
her partner and family will want the pregnancy to run the full term; in a pacifist society there must 
be no more killing of unborn children - abortions are contrary to the core vision and philosophy of 
the Peace Party. 
  
e. All People need policies for a Peaceful Environment 
  
where we work with nature, using only our fair share of resources and  
recognizing that every action rapidly affects every other across the globe 
  
Our government needs to pass laws to 
  
1. Make sure that everyone has access to free local travel with longer journeys being even more 
heavily subsidized than they are at present; 
  
2. Ensure, by means of subsidies for wind, wave, hydro-electric power (river and tidal), solar, 
nuclear fusion and biomass burning that everyone has access to sufficient, non-polluting energy - 
aim to replace as soon as possible nuclear fission power and the burning of all carbon-dioxide-
producing fuels - gas, coal, oil.  Indeed, petroleum, coal and uranium are too useful to burn. 
  
3. Subsidise the storage of "wastes" from burning and nuclear reactions for future use (we do not 
know what new technologies will require as raw materials). 
  
4. Subsidise scientific research programmes. 
  
5. Guarantee that, as far as is humanly possible, no-one anywhere in Britain or the world will ever 
go hungry again by putting in place fail-safe devices to move food to wherever it is needed. 
  
6. Support fair trade/trade justice by maintaining a minimum price for products and a minimum 
wage for producers as well as guaranteeing markets using subsidies. 
  
7. On climate change - (i) reduce carbon dioxide emissions by: 
  
Subsidising public transport (making it free locally and at very low cost for longer journeys) thus 
making it more attractive for car-owners whilst  
Taxing, even more heavily, petrol and diesel in private vehicles  
Subsidising cycling (e.g by providing bike pools and cycle routes) instead of private car-driving  
Subsidising the development of hydrogen-powered and electrically-powered private transport 
(where batteries are charged from non-polluting electrical energy)  
Subsidising the production of renewable sources of power including run-of-river (not big dams 
and reservoirs) and tidal hydro-electric power, wind-generated electricity, solar power and bio-gas  
Subsidising the development of fusion reaction for electrical power production to replace coal, oil 
and gas  
Subsidising companies converting from carbon dioxide-producing to non-polluting processes 
whilst  
Taxing companies producing carbon dioxide  
Taxing timber that cannot be shown to be from forests that are re-planted with trees of similar 
species  
Working through the United Nations to do all the above all over the world (more "Kyoto 
Protocols")  
Educating children and adults about the dangers of carbon dioxide pollution 
  
8. On climate change - (ii) reduce methane emissions by: 
  
Taxing waste put into landfill  
Subsidising re-cycling and re-use of materials 
  
9. Reduce other man-produced pollutants by: 
  
Subsidising companies to convert from polluting to non-polluting processes  
Taxing the polluters  
Educating children and adults about the dangers of all kinds of pollution 
  
10. On climate change - (iii) reduce the percentage of atmospheric carbon dioxide by: 
  
Subsidising tree-planting (to increase this "carbon sink") including "edible landscaping" i.e. fruit 
and nut trees. 
  
11. On climate change - (iv) reduce its possible effects (e.g. global warming, changes in rainfall 
patterns, increased windiness and possible local cooling) by: 
  
Subsidising changes in forestry and agriculture - draining fields, introducing irrigation, bringing 
new land into cultivation to maintain and increase food production (as sea level rises and 
agricultural land is flooded)  
Planning to re-locate residents, factories, offices, roads and railways (as sea level rises)  
Developing multi-skilled emergency services (a Peace Party-governed country would have no 
military to lean on)  
Improving water supply (e.g. by creating canals and pipelines from high to low rainfall areas, by 
improving storage of water, underground and in reservoirs), by the de-salination of sea/salt-water, 
by subsidising rain-water collection)  
Improving/introducing flood relief schemes in river valleys  
Constructing /making higher coastal defences to protect lands liable to flood as sea levels rise.  
(Such engineering works may have limited life but they will allow time for populations to be moved 
and for new agricultural land to be brought into use.)  
Working through the United Nations to do all the above all over the world  
Educating children and adults about their role in climate change through, for example, the 
National Curriculum and advertising 
   
f. Conclusion 
  
1. The Peace Party stands beyond the left, right and centre of current politics. 
  
2. The Peace Party has a radical vision-led programme which is democratic and anti-authoritarian 
and stands beyond those who support the status quo and thus outside current trends in politics.  
"Without vision, the people perish."  
  
3. The Peace Party is a secular political group.  It welcomes people of all religions - and of none. 
  
4. Peace Party members elected to Parliament have agreed to accept only the equivalent of the 
national minimum wage for skilled workers plus actual travel and subsistence expenses incurred. 
  
Revised 26th March, 2005
