Listening, Standing Together, Turning Forward!

Manifesto

The Welsh Socialist Party
April 2005


Our Manifesto
Listening, Standing Together, Turning Forward!
Since our launch in 2003, Forward Wales has mounted numerous campaigns to improve the lives of ordinary hardworking people. We've listened to, lived alongside and shared local people's concerns about our communities, about families, about jobs and pensions, about housing and the environment, health, crime and education. We've stood together to campaign for better public services, for free school meals, to stem the loss of public space, to restrict polluters and promote re-cycling. In only two years we've been joined by thousands of others, taking 23% of the vote in the last council elections. And we've accepted a duty to represent these campaigners, these voters, together successfully putting in place a hard-working Councillor in Wrexham and allowing me to continue to represent the people of Wrexham as an Assembly member in Cardiff ­ we're working exhaustively to put people If you've been turned off by New before profits ­ we're asking Labour - give Forward Wales their you here to give us a mandate turn. Turn up and vote on the to represent you in 5th May for your Forward Wales Westminster. candidate. By default, the Labour Party gave us this duty to represent you because they turned away from ordinary hard working people. This mantle of representation has now passed to Forward Wales - we're part of local communities and local campaigns and so are closer to local people than any other Party in Wales. We now need to place the interests of ordinary hard working people, your interests, at the heart of UK Government in Westminster. Of all the Parties, we're best placed to do so - our members are themselves community campaigners, trade unionists and socialists ­ our candidates across Wales are ordinary hard working people, disinterested in the status and salaries that come with being a Member of Parliament, more interested in improving the conditions and lives of the people they represent. We've set out here the principles that created Forward Wales and that sustain our work locally, nationally and internationally. We describe some of our campaigns so you can understand how our policies have grown from strong democratic principles and processes ­ they are the product of debate, social action and decisions made at our National Conference.

Dr John Marek
Leader of Forward Wales

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page ii


Contents
Why We're Standing in the Westminster Elections DEVELOPING ­ We're Listening: Developing Public Services Developing a Healthy Population Developing Dignity for Pensioners DELIVERING ­ We're Standing Together: Delivering Affordable Housing Delivering Economic Progress Delivering a Participatory Democracy Delivering Education RETURNING JUSTICE ­ Turning Forward Returning Justice to Taxation Returning Justice to the Environment Returning Justice in Asylum & Immigration Justice for the Welsh Language Justice Internationally End the Injustice of War Integrated Transport Justice in Communities Justice for Young People FUNDING Forward Wales' Policies

Page

1 2 2 3 4 5 5 6 7 8 9 9 10 11 12 14 15 16 16 17 18

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page iii


Why we're standing in the Westminster elections
We're standing to give voters a chance to elect candidates who will represent the millions not millionaires. Forward Wales is providing voters with a real alternative to the stale politics of Westminster. Our candidates are working people, committed to listening to working people, standing together with them, and working with them to turn Wales into a more prosperous, tolerant, socially just and democratically engaging country. As the Political Party closest to working people, pensioners and the young we have a duty to take forward our many campaigns ­ to listen, stand up and turn Wales Forward! By voting for us, you will be lodging a distinct voice for change in the way our country is run. Every vote for Forward Wales is a vote to turn heads, a vote that gives out strong messages: A Parliament for Wales with fair funding; Defend our public services - from the NHS to the post office and council housing - turn off FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: the threats brought by Hard working people in Wales privatisation; A fair deal on pensions ­ return to the link with wages;

A fully funded NHS free at the point of need ­ turn off the waiting list scandal;

don't yet receive the wages, public services and prosperity they deserve.

Affordable housing for all ­ turn homes into necessities, not luxuries; A greener and cleaner Wales ­ turn off opencast, turn away from incinerators, turn off nuclear; turn forward towards zero waste and cleaner energy policies; Public ownership of the rail network ­ turn the railways back into a service that serves the needs of passengers not the greed of companies; Troops out of Iraq - turn off the lies, return the troops and the truth - no more wars for oil. New Labour are no more than Old Tories, both chip away at hard won public services, shovelling bigger profits to shareholders, taking money better spent on pensions, the young and the lowpaid. That's why we're standing in this election - so join us and turn away from this stale, self-serving Westminster politics and towards a radical new alternative - Forward Wales.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 1


Developing Public Services
This Government's obsession with private profit rather than public need has seen green spaces sold for luxury housing, private firms profiting from schools and hospitals and essential council housing sold to the private sector. No public service is safe under Labour ­ they've taken up the Tories' privatisation zeal though even they baulked at selling off Air Traffic Control - Labour pushed ahead and privatised it. Now they've got the Post Office in FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: their sights. Forward Wales is Committed to open & campaigning alongside trade pluralist politics, Forward unions to save the postal service Wales will co-operate where a from privatisation. We know the common cause exists. most profitable parts will be cherry picked, losing the cross-subsidy and rocketing the cost of sending letters. Like we've seen with many sub-post offices, letter-box deliveries could soon disappear in rural communities altogether. At every opportunity, Forward Wales will challenge the appropriateness of both the Private Finance Initiative (PFIs) and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs). Instead of saving money, PFIs and PPPs have become a long-term drain on the public purse, handing over taxes from working people, taken from hard earned wages, believed to be earmarked for improving public services, pensions and benefits but locked instead into private profits and shareholder dividends.

Forward Wales puts people before profits. We work for: Free residential care for those in need ­ turn on care regardless of ability to pay; Affordable homes privatisation; ­ turn off council house

Turn Forward for Public Services

Better education ­ turn on smaller class sizes, turn off tuition fees; Free & nutritious school meals for all children ­ turn future generations into healthier populations; A publicly owned Rail, fully integrated public transport ­ turn on investment, turn off disastrous privatisation; A better Health Service­ turn away from the misery of one in 10 people on Welsh NHS waiting lists.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 2


Developing a Healthy Population
Labour Makes Us Sick. More than one in 10 people in Wales is on an NHS waiting list - that's 310,000 out of a population of 2.9m. We need a radical answer to this Welsh health crisis ­ this Government is wrecking the health service fought for and founded by Aneurin Bevan. As a priority, what's needed is a blitz on waiting lists whilst planning long-term for the health of the nation. We know that good food, exercise and fresh air bring good health and wellbeing. That's why we've been campaigning to keep and provide more public spaces, to stop polluters and reduce toxins and to provide free and nutritious school meals to create a more healthy population long-term and start tackling obesity in kids - obesity-related illnesses costs £6bn to the NHS each year - that's £300m for Wales - free school FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: meals would only cost £100m. We will work to protect the The NHS in Wales is in crisis - we long-term life chances of cannot allow this to continue. The future generations. longer people wait, the more serious their conditions become; the more misery they endure, the more difficult it is for NHS staff to cope. How many people need to face death before they get treatment? The cost of ending this NHS waiting list scandal will be enormous. But the cost of not doing this will be far greater in terms of our people's health. Because of an unfair funding formula, every man, woman and child in Wales is being robbed of £5 a week by London. Every vote for Forward Wales will put pressure to release that cash... purely for the NHS. We demand that London returns that fiver to each man, woman and child. This £800m a year would pay for a radical overhaul of the NHS in Wales.

Turn Forward for a Healthy Wales

Forward Wales puts need before greed. We work for: A fully funded NHS free at the point of need ­ turn off the waiting list scandal; Free & nutritious school meals for all children ­ turn future generations into healthier populations; Better public services that work ­ turn away from the misery of one in 10 people on Welsh NHS waiting lists; A greener and cleaner Wales ­ turn off polluters and turn on fresh air and more public parks.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 3


Developing Dignity for Pensioners
Forward Wales is the only political party in the UK to have signed up to the six key points of the Pensioners' Charter. With the National Pensioners Convention who represent more than 1.5 million pensioners, we will be working to bring all 600,000 pensioners in Wales: £105 a week as a basic state pension to all men and women; A rise every year to the basic state pension in line with average earnings; Free travel on bus and rail; A replacement of the council tax with a fairer system based on the ability to pay; The abolition of age discrimination in the provision of all goods and services; Free long-term care. By contrast, this Government is attacking pensions in the public sector ­ trying to force fire-fighters, teachers, nurses, council workers and civil servants to work 5 years longer for their pensions. The only two groups exempt from this are the police... and MPs.

Turn Forward for Dignity in Retirement
Forward Wales puts respect before collect. We work for: Decent pensions for all ­ turn off means testing and turn on a basic pension of £105 a week; A fair local tax based on people's ability to pay ­ turn off the Council Tax; More Home Helps ­ don't turn the elderly out of their homes where appropriate help can be delivered to their door; Nursing care in the community ­ turn off hospital bed blocking, turn on social work and health service cooperation to provide this needed care; Public sector sheltered accommodation if own home care isn't appropriate.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 4


Delivering Affordable Housing
Local people can't afford to live in their own communities first-time buyers throughout Wales are facing ruinous rents or mountainous mortgages. We want to raise the level of social housing available from its current all-time low by allowing local authorities to use money from council house receipts to build new homes where they are needed rather than rely on speculative housing developers. New Labour's obsession with privatising all public services has reached absurd levels. In turning over council houses to the private sector, it is willing to give away thousands of homes and hopes, wipe out outstanding debt and allow private housing associations far greater freedom than local authorities to borrow and invest in repairs and renovations. We call for a level-playing field, where councils are able to respond to tenants' needs for better quality housing. We call on the London government to accept there is no will for the stock transfer of council housing to the private sector in Wales. On the contrary, we need more affordable housing - freeing up councils to improve their housing stock will return hope to young people that they can move into their own home in their own community.

Turn Forward for Social Housing

Forward Wales puts affordability before profitability. We work to: Empowering councils to build, buy and buy back social housing ­ turn off sell-offs; Reduce council house voids ­ turn off this waste, turn on new social housing; Support first-time buyers to stay in communities ­ turn hopes into reality; their own

Free up housing ­ turn second homes into luxuries by doubling the tax on them.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 5


Delivering Economic Progress
Whilst earnings for the low paid have improved, the minimum wage has not brought the decency and fairness promised. There are still too many paid below the minimum wage, too many who have to have top ups of State aid and too many who face the daily indignity of unsocial hours to find themselves still trapped in poverty. Forward Wales will fight for a Living Wage for every worker in the UK. We will insist the Low Pay Commission come up with a sustainable formula that ensures no worker has to top up their wages by relying on State support through Welfare Benefits or Tax Credits. This formula must address discrimination against women who continue to receive a much lower wage than men. We will push for an immediate minimum wage of £7.36 an hour for all employees of working age. [This figure is two-thirds of
the median gross hourly rate for a man working full-time in the UK in 2004.] Forward Wales stands alongside a number of trade

unions, anti-poverty groups and community organisations who have been campaigning for a UK Living FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: Wage for the low-paid. Citizens are equal and By having 3 age related bands (16-17, 18-21, unfair discrimination 22+), the current minimum wage is should be outlawed. discriminatory cover - young workers are paid less for the same work. European funding should be better used to raise the wealth of the nation - more than £1.2 billion has been provided in Wales over the past five years because large parts of our country are among the poorest in Europe ­ incomes under 75% of the EU's average. Despite this Objective One bonus, under Labour Wales is actually worse off. Procurement policies should favour locally sourced, GM-free and, wherever possible, organic food so that the population's health and local livelihoods are protected and fuel saved from the pointless importation of locally available produce.

Turn Forward for Economic Progress
Forward Wales puts local sourcing before pointless importing. We work to bring: Decent food, decent wages and decent livelihoods to the people of Wales; A living wage for all ­ turn off a minimum wage that forces State top ups ­ turn over a decent wage for a decent living; An end to poverty ­ turn on Fair Trade; turn Wales into the World's first Fair Trade nation.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 6


Delivering a Participatory Democracy
Democracy is about people taking control of their own lives, communities and workplaces. People feel disenfranchised because decisions are being taken behind closed doors and in remote corridors of power. We want to nourish the grassroots of Welsh democracy. Research shows a growing support for a National Assembly with more powers whilst voters have become more disillusioned with politicians. In Wales we need a democracy in which our institutions are fully answerable to voters, where participative democracy encourages the involvement of citizens at all levels of government, and where civil society is fully recognised and where social action and broad-based organising is fully recognised. If the National Assembly's goal of sustainable development is to be realised, its policies need to reflect this commitment. The Assembly needs to use its voice on the international FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: stage, as the elected institution The National Assembly should which reflects the will of the Welsh enjoy parity and no fewer people. powers than other UK nations.

Turn Forward for a Participative Democracy

Forward Wales puts local decision-making alongside international harmony. We call for the: Full implementation of the Richard Commission report ­ turn the National Assembly into powerhouse for Wales; Development of an ethical Welsh investment and procurement policies ­ turn to local sourcing for the benefit of communities and the environment; Ending of subsidies from public funds for the research, production or testing of armaments in Wales ­ turn away from military solutions to international disputes; Promotion, renewal and support for the UN ­ turn on democratic regional decision-making as the best safeguard for international harmony. In Wales, we want a powerful Parliament where the people of Wales are trusted to make decisions that affect us; laws that confirm our identity and civility; and, revenue-raising powers that enable us to develop our own responses to our own issues and aspirations.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 7


Delivering Education
This Government's ill-thought out plan to put more and more youngsters into higher education has created a generation of debtors. The average debt of a student leaving university is now £15,000. Worse still, the number of students dropping out of college is at an alltime high as financial pressures take their toll. Education should be a right not a privilege and so we will work to scrap tuition fees for students.

Healthy Schools for Healthy Living.
Forward Wales wants safeguards to improve the quality and safety of the school environment. Schools should be the centrepiece of community life where children learn to be sociable and caring. Schools need the resources and class sizes to play a stronger role in helping to foster equality, teaching wider civic values and an understanding of healthy living. As well as preparing future citizens, helping to create sustainable livelihoods and promoting mutual care and concern, schools need to reflect and rehearse wider social issues. Too often these wider responsibilities are crowded out by financial or other pressures, forcing schools to concentrate unduly on narrower academic targets. Too often a lack of clarity, authority or resources means that a concern with social values is compromised.

Turn Forward for Education

Forward Wales puts learning at the heart of its work. We call for: Scrapping tuition fees for students ­ turn education into a right not a privilege; A guarantee that all schools are pollution-free; transport regulations that ensure seat belts are available and worn and that a seat is available for every child on a school bus; school buses to be built to US-style "yellow bus" standards; procedures that bring safety and security to pupils and teachers during school hours ­ turn on care for their welfare as pupils and we'll reap the return as they become citizens who care; New procurement policies that insist on locally sourced products, meeting new nutritional standards, in all school meals ­ turn the `junk food' generation into `good food' junkies; Revised guidelines setting improved standards for the provision of playing fields, sporting and recreational facilities ­ turn out pupils who know the benefits of exercise and physical activity; New roles for schools promoting healthy living, social care and citizenship for pupils, families and the local community. For the past six months, well before Jamie Oliver's TV bandwagon got rolling, Forward Wales has been campaigning for a return to free and nutritious school meals for all school children in Wales. If we properly feed the body, the mind will surely follow.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 8


Returning Justice to Taxation
The Government has doubled the Council Tax in real terms. Council Tax re-banding has turned the Welsh into guinea pigs, just like the Scots were by Thatcher with the Poll Tax. If your house has gone up a band, Council Tax will increase by around 20% this year. If your house has gone up two bands, you will need to find an extra 40% over two years. This Council Tax is unfair ­ it's a tax on the elderly and the low-paid. Re-banding has brought a 15% rise to almost a half of all households. Few of those households have seen their pensions or wages rise by anything near that amount.

VAT - Taxation on food and necessities is also an unfair tax. As VAT

has increased and become applied to more and more goods and services, the proportion of tax paid by those on low or modest incomes has increased proportionally compared with the rich. We will push for a return to pay-as-you-earn as the only fair form of personal taxation. directors take home millions in salaries, bonuses, shares and retirement funds even when their companies struggle. Meanwhile we've seem company pension schemes raided to keep these fat-cats in place. And this Government hasn't helped much they've ruined occupational pensions: taxing pension company' profits so that the ordinary worker's pension will be reduced. £35 billion has been siphoned out of pensions by Labour over the past 8 years. If you're not a fat-cat and your company goes bust, you've had it! Labour has failed to safeguard pension funds, and the new compensation scheme has only enough money in it for one company failure. We've also seen record profits being made by banks, supermarkets and oil companies ­ all of whom use tax avoidance schemes to keep money out of the public purse. We will press for a windfall tax on the excessive profits of big business.

Tax Windfall Profits and Fat-Cat Bonuses - We've seen company

Turn Forward for Fair Taxation
Forward Wales wants to return justice to taxation. We call for: Fair taxes based on people's ability to pay ­ turn off the Council Tax, turn away from VAT, turn towards a local income tax; An increase in the higher rate of tax ­ turn the rate up from 40% to 50%, even a maximum wage to curb the excesses of fat-cat pay; A windfall tax on the excessive profits of big business ­ turn the tables on tax avoidance, make them take a turn at tax allegiance.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 9


Returning Justice to the Environment
We live in an age where 86 per cent of the planet's natural resources are consumed by 20 per cent of its population; where rich countries use up more than their fair share of energy, water, timber and minerals, bequeathing long-lasting health problems and depleted environments to local communities, wildlife and future generations. Across the world those people with least power and money are disproportionately affected when the environment is damaged, and the root causes of these problems are a skewed approach to economics (which does not consider the social or environmental cost of development), and businesses whose sole goal is profit. Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary General has said: "without controlling the environment and climate change, I don't think we stand a chance of achieving the Millennium Development Goals".

FORWARD WALES PRINCIPLE: In the West, we need to reduce our energy Support & participate in use by extending existing home insulation movements to secure peace, schemes to all council houses and those homes owned by the pensioners. We need freedom, international comany more alternative energy sources operation for sustainable we advocate small-scale renewable power development & social justice. schemes and will consider large-scale renewable developments that have community support, e.g. offshore wind and sea turbines. We will examine innovative technologies such as hydrogen and photovoltaic cells to reduce our dependence on diminishing fossil fuels and inconsistent wind power. Wales is a world leader in wind power with Powys able to power 40% of homes in the county by wind power alone. But Welsh communities see few benefits from these schemes in a practical sense.
Nuclear power is being touted as clean and safe but this is not the case. Trawsfynydd will remain in a concrete sarcophagus for hundreds of years because scientists are unsure how to dispose of the nuclear reactor. Radioactive waste has a half-life of many thousands of years and we still don't know the long-term effects of the existing power plants in Wales. Wales lags behind the rest of Europe in recycling waste, partly because we have so many quarries to fill with our rubbish. Forward Wales supports a policy of Zero Waste that asks local councils to adopt an aggressive policy of recycling for domestic, industrial and commercial waste. Councils such as Lichfield already recycle 45% of domestic waste and are on course for zero landfill by 2016. This is a realisable target for all Welsh councils too. In the longer term, we want stricter guidelines on commercial packaging to minimise waste at source. The case for incineration (including pyrolysis and gasification) of waste is not proven. On the contrary, it has been shown to be a dirty, dangerous and expensive method of dealing with our waste, as the people of Crumlyn Burrows near Swansea can testify. Opencast mining brings a quick profit for big companies and longterm misery and health hazards for Welsh communities.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 10


Turn Forward for Environmental Justice
Forward Wales wants to return justice to the global environment. We call for:

An equitable and sustainable global society ­ turn on justice, return to common brotherhood and sisterhood; Fully independent assessments of the environmental and social impacts of proposed developments ­ turn on ethical trading and international co-operation; The transparent spending of tax-payers' money ­ turn on beneficial and turn off harmful development; The use of the principle of "tax the polluter, reward the non-polluter"; A drive towards local sustainability and self-sufficiency and support local communities; A turn towards resources whose uses have little or no environmental impact.

Turn Forward for Justice in Asylum & Immigration
Wales has attracted migrant workers throughout its history and we should be proud of our ability to provide asylum to people fleeing oppressive regimes and torture abroad. Labour and the Tories are united in playing the racist card on asylum and immigration.
Forward Wales wants to maintain justice for those legitimately seeking work or escaping oppression. We call for:

The prosecution of gangmasters and sweatshop bosses who illegally profit from the exploitation of migrant labour; Increased trade union solidarity to protect workers whatever their origins; International co-operation and fairness in the flow of workers ­ if Dysons can freely travel the world, why can't the Malaysians who make them?

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 11


Justice for the Welsh Language
The flooding of Tryweryn was an insult to our nation and it outraged a generation. The loss of Capel Celyn showed how vulnerable we are to external economic forces, how easy it is to destroy a Welsh-speaking community, communities on which the survival of the Welsh language ultimately depends. Forty years ago the economic driver was the demand of water hungry, industrialised Northern England, operating unhindered by a compliant political system. Today the economic driver threatening the long term survival of Welsh-speaking communities is the yawning prosperity and opportunity gap between those Welshspeaking communities and their natural hinterland and other more prosperous parts of the UK. Labour claims that the solution is entirely economic, create a growing economy and you save the language. Even by their own standards, this policy if failing. During the last three years, over the duration of the Objective 1 programme, we have seen:Employment grow in West Wales and the Valleys by less than one third of the non Objective 1 area; The differences in pay widen by 40% between the 2 areas to the detriment of the Objective 1 area; The numbers of 16-35 year olds in employment in the Objective 1 area fall by 34,000. This is unsustainable. An economic record like this, with widening disparities, guarantees migration in ways which work to the detriment of sustainable Welsh-speaking communities. It deepens the prosperity divide, discourages inward investment, destabilises the property market, weakens locally based economies and undermines the viability of public services. With prospects such as this, there can be no secure future for the language. Forward Wales strongly supports measures to extend the understanding and use of the Welsh language across geographical and generational boundaries. We recognise that to ensure long-term survival, the language must grow and extend its boundaries of natural use. To that end we positively campaign for Welsh medium education and the implementation of language development policies outside of the Welsh-speaking heartland. But we cannot ignore the threats to the heartland itself and that is an issue we have to address. Other small nations of the EU have their own self-governing powers and can set their own official language and have this recognised as such within the EU.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 12


These advantages are not available to Welsh which suffers the double disadvantage of being vulnerable (as are other minority languages) to the powerful influence of English as a global force but also to the pressure of belonging to a small country, adjacent to a powerful, rich, aggressive and expansionist neighbour. Forward Wales believes we should re-affirm Welsh, our historic language, as a first language of Wales, to be used at every opportunity and as a beacon for us at home and in work. Welsh should remain an essential part of our vigorous, bilingual country finding expression for a unique culture and in the experiences in our daily lives. It offers economic and social gains as well as the more traditional contribution to culture and identity. What better could we ask for as a fascinating and distinctive element in our new education system, helping to make Wales one of Europe¹s leading language centres? Wales should have a richer array of measures. These should be available to local and other authorities to sustain and develop housing, education, economic development and employment, community viability, landscape and environment, and the lifestyles capable of sustaining the unique characteristics of Welsh-language communities. These powers should cover control and regulation and allow access to practical and financial support for activities shown to promote language and cultural survival and development.

Turn Forward for Justice for the Welsh Language
Forward Wales wants to sustain justice for Welsh language & culture. We call for:

Community development for a Wales that serves its people and communities rather than bureaucracy and big business; Economic and social intervention that seeks to sustain and develop environments capable of sustaining, and conducive to, the growth of a language which represents the rich diversity of European culture and a priceless, irreplaceable but vulnerable part of our historical inheritance; The designation of our Welsh-speaking heartland as a European Area of High Cultural Significance.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 13


Justice Internationally
We live in a world where the 3 richest individuals have more wealth than the 600 million poorest; where half the world lives on two dollars a day; where the gap between the richest and poorest grows each year; and where many countries, including most of sub-Saharan Africa, are poorer than they were twenty years ago. These inequalities result from the policies of international institutions which work in the interests of the rich - policies that put business before communities - an economic system that puts profit before people.

Turn Forward for Justice Internationally
Forward Wales wants justice for all people's of the world. We call for:

A European Charter enshrining the rights of workers, communities and consumers ­ turn off one that serves the interest of government and big business; An end to export subsidies, particularly for arms exports ­ turn around the Export Credit Guarantee Department; Governments to decide their own trade policies ­ turn on those that protect and nurture indigenous agriculture and local food production, and environmentally sustainable industries; International trade rules ­ turn towards helping the poor and saving the environment; A cancellation of the debts of the poorest countries ­ return some hope that they can address their own poverty without worrying about our profits; Global institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank and the WTO to become genuinely democratic; Wales to become the world's first Fair Trade country; Local production, provision and acquisition of goods and services; The reversal in the privatisation of public services such as water, electricity, health and education.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 14


End the Injustice of War
The culture of war and violence has been heightened by recent attacks on Afghanistan and Iraq. In such wars 90 per cent of victims are civilians and the majority of those are children and women. War and preparations for war are a huge waste of valuable resources, bring long-lasting pollution and ill-health. War also undermines human rights and creates increasing despair. Our fragile environment and embattled peoples cannot support endless wars. The development of more and more 'sophisticated' weaponry means that we must reject violence now or perish. In a forward-looking Wales, we should be showing vision and setting an example by promoting the UN Decade of Peace and Non-Violence launched in 2000. We will work actively for disarmament, to address the causes of war, promote peaceful conflict resolution and act in the best interests of generations yet to come.

Turn Forward to End the Injustice of War
Forward Wales wants non-violent resolution to international conflicts. We call for: The UK to uphold Article VI of the nuclear NonProliferation Treaty (NPT) ­ turn it on in the UK then lead the world to nuclear disarmament; Abandoning pre-emptive strikes ­ turn on legal and ethical military policies; Real understanding of its causes to better address the causes of terror; An end to UK participation in the US led 'National Missile Defence' program and the Mutual Defence Agreement with the USA ­ turn off our breaches of the nuclear NonProliferation Treaty; More action to support justice and peace to all peoples in the Middle East; The removal of all foreign military bases and facilities from the UK; Resistance to the intrusion of the State into our lives ­ turn away from more surveillance, control and information gathering (e.g. ID cards, national DNA database); The development of non-violent methods for conflict resolution ­ turn to recognise the threats from poverty, environmental degradation and breaches of human rights.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 15


Turn Forward for Integrated Transport
Forward Wales wants a more integrated system for the travelling public. We call for:

Efficient, reliable, clean and cheap public transport ­ turn away from the time wasted and pollution brought by car congestion; An integrated transport network across Wales ­ return to public ownership of the rail network; Public subsidies to improve the public transport ­ turn towards the interests of passengers, turn away from lining the pockets of private shareholders.

Turn Forward for Justice in Communities
Forward Wales wants safer, more locally determined communities where the fear of crime and crime itself is much reduced. We call for:

Greater community input into policing - turn on community accountability, turn off "no-go" areas, turn on safety in homes and public spaces; An increase in resources available to drug rehabilitation and detoxification clinics in Wales ­ turn on effective cooperation between the police, drug agencies and the medical profession; Treatment to become a priority for drug users and exoffenders ­ turn around the waiting lists for clinics & centres to turn off re-offending whilst desperate for help.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 16


Turn Forward for Justice for Young People
Forward Wales wants young people to inherit a society free of discrimination where people care about each other, can earn a decent wage from decent work and can live in communities that respect needs and aspirations. We call for: An end to age discrimination ­ turn off the age related levels of the minimum wage, turn on the principle of the same wage for the same work; A more honest and engaging political process ­ turn off the vested interests, lies, mistruths and myths, turn on a participatory process that require decisionmakers to reflect the views of all members of the community, including children and young people; A reduction in the voting age to 16 years; Scrapping tuition fees.

The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005

Page 17


Funding Forward Wales's Policies
This Manifesto has identified a broad range of policies that we are working to achieve, that we believe will bring real improvements to the lives of ordinary hard-working people, pensioners and the young. We have hinted at where we see funding being generated to support these radical and comprehensive policies. Forward Wales believes the millions spent on the illegal war in Iraq could be better spent on public services. But let's make it clear, we support the re-distribution of wealth within the UK and across the world. We will press for new funding to come from the following sources: We support and will continue to campaign for greater taxation on the wealthy individuals ­ turn on a 50% rate on those earning more than £1,000 a week; We support and will continue to campaign for greater taxation on the wealthy companies ­ turn on a tax on Windfall profits on banks and big corporations; We support and will continue to campaign for those in the upper tax bracket to pay their share of National Insurance ­ turn off the upper limit; We support and will continue to campaign for a fairer funding formula for Wales to regain the £800m a year currently being kept by the London government. In only two years Forward Wales has become the Party for ordinary hard-working people. As you have read here, we've listened to, lived alongside and shared local people's concerns about our communities, about families, about jobs and pensions, about housing and the environment, health, crime and education. We've stood together to push for better public services, for free school meals, to If you've been turned off by New stem the loss of public space, to restrict polluters and promote re- Labour - give Forward Wales their turn. Turn up and vote on the cycling. 5th May for your Forward Wales Like thousands of others before candidate. you, this May you have the chance to turn heads, to turn Forward and to Turn in members of parliament who are immersed in the issues and concerns you have. They're ready and willing to accept the duty to represent you, to put people before profits ­ we're asking you here to give us a mandate to represent you in Westminster.

PUT PEOPLE BEFORE PROFIT VOTE FOR A REAL ALTERNATIVE VOTE FORWARD WALES
The Manifesto of Forward Wales ­ April 2005
Page 18


