Protest Vote Party
Manifesto

We believe that the public have the right to say: "Sorry, but none of the candidates are good enough to represent me. You are not who I want. I do not know enough about any of them to give them the power to vote on laws that crucially affect me and my family."

Protest Vote Party

"It's not that people can't be bothered to vote. There's just no one suitable to vote for."

Above" Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above"

www.ProtestVoteParty.org www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Two party state ..........................3 Our aim .....................................4 Our method................................5 Responsibility .............................6 An apolitical stance .....................6 Party objectives ..........................7 Put aside the unsuitable ...............8 Repel the repellent ......................9 Offering an alternative .................9 Political process ........................ 10 Unfit behaviour ......................... 11 Get involved............................. 12 Membership form ...................... 13

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 2 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


We live in a two party state. Politics is coloured either blue or red. For the past fifty years and more the Liberals have been proving this true.
So what can you do when Labour and the Conservatives are in agreement on an issue you strongly disagree with? "You could join one of them?" "Yeah, right! The Party Leaders listen to their members even less than they listen to the general public."

"You could vote for the Liberal Democrats?" "To what end? Over the past two decades both the main parties have gone into self-destruct mode while the LibDem's have remained the weak third party with no real power. I'm sure they'll comment that it shows they are consistent."

"You could join a minority party?" "Nice ideas, good sentiments, no MP's, no effect."

"Win a seat as an independent?" "You become 1 of 659. Nope, no chance of changing anything there either, sorry."

"You could join up with others and have a riot in the streets?" "Yeah, that does seem to work. Even Margaret Thatcher responded to that one. It's a bit drastic though and hardly environmentally friendly."

"Surely there must be an alternative?" "Well instead of trying to fight the main parties why not encourage their MP's to listen to you more and less to their party hierarchy?"

"OK, but how do you do that?" Turn over the page and let us explain...

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 3 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Our aim
make MP's to listen more to their constituents and less to their party hierarchy
Seemingly, because we believe that our politicians lie, cheat, mislead, act illegally or against our interests, then some of them think they are entitled to do so. The rise of the `professional politician' means that they have had no experience of life outside of politics. Like the kid at school who was only interested in being a footballer, this new breed of MP has nothing to fall back on if their political career does not flourish. Others get far too accustomed to the lifestyle that an MP's salary (and expenses) affords them. They become reliant on the patronage of their party leadership to progress their careers and that patronage comes at a cost. A cost usually paid by a betrayed public in the MP's constituency. We do live in a two party state. The Liberal Democrats have proved this time and time again ­ they may pick up a few seats through tactical and protest votes but it never ever affects the status quo. It's a situation that both Labour and the Conservatives are totally happy with. New methods of `party discipline" adopted by both main parties may provide a united party front to the public, but it often leads to MP's voting against their consciences and their constituents wishes. This is why the Protest Vote Party was formed.

We believe that the public have the right to say: "Sorry, but none of the candidates are good enough to represent me. You are not who I want. I do not know enough about any of them to give them the power to vote on laws that crucially affect me and my family".

The Protest Vote Party gives you the right to vote "None of the Above"

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 4 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Our method
Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above"
When a Protest Vote Party candidate wins an election they will resign after sitting their first day in Parliament. By this method they truly allow voters the opportunity to vote "None of the above". The Protest Vote Party will not normally put forward a candidate in a by-election its resignation creates. It will only stand again if one of the main UK parties fields an ex-MP who was rejected by voters at the last General Election, or a candidate who has lost to a Protest Vote Party candidate since the last General Election. In essence this means that any sitting MP or party candidate who does not have the trust and respect of constituents could find themselves out of Parliament for a whole parliamentary period ­ regardless of whether they were designated to become a minister or backbencher. A sobering thought for those MP's in safe seats who ignore their constituents' wishes. The Protest Vote Party is a new, emerging party. We will only be standing one seat in the 2005 General Election due to a lack of time and resources. Our true force will be felt throughout the next Parliament. At the next election we aim to field 100 candidates. Although we will specifically select a number of high profile target seats, at least half the seats we stand will be randomly chosen. This means that all MP's of the next parliament will have to create a rapport with their constituents, acting on constituents requests, voting in line with constituents wishes (regardless of the party whip). If they do not, they personally risk losing to a Protest Vote Party candidate at the next election even if they are in a 'safe' party seat. We forewarn all successful candidates in this year's election to look to your constituents. Otherwise, at the next election, they may look to us.

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 5 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Responsibility
It is not the intention of the Protest Vote Party to destabilise the political process of the United Kingdom. Our stated aim is to re-focus the actions of elected members, of all political parties, to represent the will of their constituents and act in their interests at all times. At each election we will carefully consider the number of seats the party will contest (General Election, Local Government or otherwise). We would never contest a number of seats that could technically give the Protest Vote Party a majority. The Protest Vote Party will not normally stand against the Prime Minister, the Chancellor of the Exchequer or their counterparts in the main UK political parties. We will also consider any request from political parties not to stand against key individuals where specific loss of that person from Parliament would be detrimental to the UK.

An apolitical stance
The Protest Vote Party welcomes people with views from across the political spectrum. As a party we do not take a stance on individual political issues, we leave that to the other political parties. The party however will comment on the political process itself ­ highlighting the workings of the Houses of Parliament and government that have no effective function or work against the public interest.

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 6 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Party objectives
of the Protest Vote Party
· to give voters the opportunity to reject all candidates for a given seat; · to enable the electorate to register a protest vote against the UK's main political parties without having to vote for an extreme party; · to encourage current UK politicians to consider their constituents wishes above the dictates of their political party hierarchy; · to counter voter apathy by offering an alternative where the electorate's vote will make a difference; · to draw attention to and encourage reform of those practices and processes of the British political system deemed ridiculous and nonsensical by the average taxpayer; · to draw attention to and encourage reform of the behaviour of elected members considered unsatisfactory by the average taxpayer.

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 7 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Put aside the unsuitable
the opportunity to reject all candidates for a given seat
The Protest Vote Party gives voters the opportunity to reject all candidates sitting in their constituency. By voting for the Protest Vote Party they are voting for "None of the Above". Any successful Protest Vote Party candidate will resign after sitting their first day in parliament. This is a core principal of the party, written into its constitution, and cannot be changed.

From now on there's no such thing as a safe seat
There are probably more than 200 safe seats in the country. That means around a third of all MP's are actually chosen by the political parties with little involvement from the electorate. It is rare that the favoured party fails to win a safe seat, even if the candidate is disliked. Martin Bell's 1997 election victory was historic but short lived. At the first opportunity the people of Tatton voted for what they really wanted, a Conservative MP who was not Neil Hamilton. The election in 2005 again sees candidates forced on local constituency parties by their party leadership. The voters in `safe seats' need a method of rejecting the offered party candidate without electing in an opposing party. The Protest Vote Party will fulfil that function. Voters in `safe seats' know they will eventually return a candidate of their preferred party. With the intervention of the Protest Vote Party they can, if they so wish, reject a party candidate who they feel does not actively vote in their interests. Party leaders who wish to ensure a colleague is elected to parliament please take note, where the Protest Vote Party stands there's no such thing as a safe seat.

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 8 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Repel the repellent
register a protest vote without voting for an extreme party
If politicians do not create a dialogue with the people and act upon it then the people will inevitably seek political justice elsewhere. The formation of the Protest Vote Party is one such example. The increasing numbers of political parties being registered with the Electoral Commission is a reflection of the electorate's belief they are not being listened to by the main political parties. The danger lies in areas where this political deafness is so acute in people's lives that they feel they have to vote for a party with extreme views. It's a shock tactic in the hope that someone will listen to them. One of the reasons that the Protest Vote Party was founded was to give the ignored an opportunity to deliver that electoral shock, a complete rejection of all candidates as not good enough, without having to resort to voting for an extreme party.

Offering an alternative
countering voter apathy
Forty percent of the British Public decided not to vote at the last election, and that doesn't include those who opted out of the electoral registers. For a government to claim it has the consent of the people there must be a significant turnout. "It's not that people can't be bothered to vote. There's just no one suitable to vote for." The current levels of voter apathy have little to do with laziness, convenience or an unwanted trek to the polling station. It is due to the failure of the political parties to produce credible, trusted, respectable candidates and policies. Creating a climate of fear about what the other party might or might not do may influence some voters' choice but with others it switches them off completely. Large numbers of the population ignore the ballot box because there is no one suitable to vote for. The Protest Vote Party gives them the opportunity to register that fact.
Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 9 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Political processes
Prime Ministers Questions
"What's That?"
What indeed. Prime Ministers Questions is purported to be the key weekly exchange in the commons. A time for the Prime Minister to be held to account. In reality it is neither. While MP's and the media relish this event, driven to a blood sport frenzy at the prospect of a good brawl, the general public are generally disinterested. Consider the last Prime Ministers Questions before the election: The public saw Michael Howard helplessly struggling to give a stand up comedy routine whilst pretending to be Bruce Forsyth with his up/down higher/lower chants. He didn't do well. (We'll leave it to your suggestions as to who his `dolly dealers' were.) Not to be outdone, Tony Blair launched into his best Vicky Pollard impression "Yeah, but, no, but, yeah, but, no. But anyway right... Gordon stop giving me eeevils!" This has nothing to do with democracy; at best it becomes a mildly entertaining sitcom. The whole procedure is staged and scripted. It is totally out of date and achieves nothing. The political parties know that PMQ's are guaranteed to appear in primetime news bulletins so they abuse the principal and turn it into a weekly party political broadcast. The media aftermath concerns itself only with who got a blooded nose and who eventually won the bout? The issues themselves are lost in the hubbub of this playground scrap. The Protest Vote Party believes Prime Minister's Questions should be staunchly reformed or be totally scrapped to free up valuable parliamentary time.

An Empty Chamber
Television coverage reveals how empty the chamber often is during debates on laws that affect everyone in the country. Supposedly MP's are too busy to turn up to hear the arguments for and against. If an MP does not hear the full debate how can they judge if the bill before them is fit to become law? Why should an MP be allowed to vote on new laws if he or she will not sit and listen to all the points for and against? Are they so arrogant to believe they have considered every possible angle? The Protest Vote Party will actively campaign for parliamentary voting to be restricted to those members who have listened to at least 85% of the debate.
Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 10 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Unfit behaviour
draw attention to the behaviour of elected members considered unsatisfactory by the average taxpayer
Watching debates into Anti-social Behaviour Orders it suddenly strikes you that if anyone warranted an ASBO it was the MP's in the chamber itself. Loutish behaviour, mob mentality, intimidation, bullying, violent disorder, and all captured on camera for the nation to see. Fortunately we are spared viewing the after-hours lock-in in the House of Commons bars! MP's are quick to censure such behaviour in today's youth yet fail to recognise the unsuitable role models they themselves have become. The whips' offices bully and intimidate MP's into voting along party lines, even if it's against their consciences or constituents wishes. There are pagers to tell backbench MP's what questions to ask and how to respond. They receive faxes of paragraphs they are to use when writing 'their column' for the local newspaper. When the going gets tough and a party has a rebellion on its hand, out comes the little black book of MP's misdemeanours to bring them back in line. A practice little short of blackmail. Why do we accept the unacceptable from our politicians? Protest Vote party will draw attention to and encourage reform of the behaviour of elected members considered unsatisfactory by the average taxpayer.

Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 11 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Get Involved
The Protest Vote Party is new. The Protest Vote Party is emerging. The Protest Vote Party is growing.
As a newly formed party our effect in the 2005 Election has been limited. However, in the following General Election we are aiming to field candidates in up to 100 seats. To achieve that aim we will need your help. We need members, donations, volunteers and people to organise local branches. We need candidates, election agents and people to nominate our candidates in local constituencies. We need printers, artists, writers, media and stationers. We need professional help from lawyers, accountants, publicity agents, and others. We need canvassers, leaflet posters, fund raisers and supporters. We need people to tell us what they think, to comment on the party's principals and to contribute new ideas. We need people to tell their friends and colleagues about us. We need YOU!

To find out more about the Protest Vote Party contact us at the address below, check out our website at www.ProtestVoteParty.org, or complete the membership form on the next page. Protest Vote Party Room 221 91 Western Road Brighton E. Sussex BN1 2NW Email: office@protestvoteparty.org

Printed by Chris Kilburn, 12 Scott Road, Hove, BN3 5HN. Promoted and published by Chris Kilburn, 12 Scott Road, Hove, BN3 5HN on behalf of the Protest Vote Party. Copyright Protest Vote Party 2005 Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 12 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


Giving you the right to vote "None of the Above" Protest Vote Party Manifesto 13 of 13

www.ProtestVoteParty.org


