Standing for the millions not the millionaires
Election manifesto 2005
 
No cuts! No privatisation...
It doesn't have to be like this... Britain is a rich country
New Labour has plenty of money to spend on war and helping its rich friends:
Since Tony Blair came to power the wealth of the top 1% has doubled from £355 
billion to £797 billion - more than the government spends in five years on education, 
the NHS and housing combined!
 
*	Say no to the fat cats
*	For a workers' MP on a worker's wage
Vote for a socialist alternative
 
The Socialist Party is fighting for:
Public services
*	No to the fat cats. Renationalise the privatised utilities under democratic 
working-class control. 
Pensions
*	An immediate 50% increase in the pension as a step towards a living pension 
for all pensioners. Annual increases to be linked to average earnings. 
*	For the right to draw a pension from 55 for those who want to. The right for a 
part-work part-pension option for those who choose it. 
*	Pensioners, having contributed to society all their lives, to have free housing, 
heating, telephone and local travel. 
Childcare and education
*	Free, good-quality education from the nursery to university. A living grant for 
all students. Abolish tuition fees now! 
*	For a massive increase in the number of free, publicly-owned nurseries, with 
fully qualified, decently paid staff. Free childcare for every parent who wants 
it. 
*	For well-funded, genuinely comprehensive, co-educational, neighbourhood 
schools. 
*	For free adult education. 
Health
*	Abolish prescription charges. 
*	No more privatisation 
*	Reverse all privatisation in the NHS. Rebuild a public National Health Service 
- free at the point of use and under democratic control. 
*	Bring the pharmaceutical industry into public ownership under democratic 
working-class control. 
*	No to the fat cats. Renationalise the privatised utilities under democratic 
working-class control. 
Housing
*	No to privatisation! 
*	High quality council housing - decent, affordable, secure and accountable. 
*	Do the repairs, renovate our homes - clear the £19 billion backlog with no 
strings attached. 
*	A tenants' vote on any changes - honest debate and equal funding for 
tenants' organisations and campaigns. 
*	The right of rent officers to force landlords to charge a fair rent. 
*	A massive building programme of public housing to meet need. Democratic 
public ownership of the giant construction corporations. 
*	Democratic public ownership of the banks and finance companies. Cancel all 
local authority debts and give mortgage holders low interest loans. 
Transport
*	Major investment into a cheap, accessible, integrated public transport system 
that meets the needs of the people and the environment.
 
Jobs and work
*	A range of policies to achieve full employment, including the introduction of a 
maximum 35-hour week without loss of pay, a massive increase in public 
spending in healthcare, housing, education, childcare, leisure and community 
facilities. 
*	For the unions to take immediate action to implement their current minimum 
wage demands, as a step towards a legal minimum of £8 an hour (the 
European Decency Threshold). No exemptions. For an annual increase in the 
minimum wage, linked to average earnings. 
*	For the right to decent benefits, training or a job without compulsion. 
*	Employment protection rights for all from day one of employment. 
*	Scrap the anti-trade union laws. Trade unions to be democratically controlled 
by their members. Full-time officials should be regularly elected and receive 
the wage of an average worker. 
*	Abolish big-business secrets. Open the books. Let the workers know where all 
the massive profits, tax rebates and subsidies have gone. No transfers of jobs 
or production without the agreement of the workers. 
*	All factories and plant threatened with closure to be brought into public 
ownership and used for socially-useful production, with compensation for 
shareholders only on the basis of proven need.
 
The environment and food
*	A socialist plan for energy production, designed to guarantee cheap and safe 
energy for all whilst protecting the environment. 
*	Such a plan should be worked out by representatives from workers in the 
energy sector, scientists, community and environmental organisations. 
*	The aim would be to replace fossil fuels and nuclear power with massive 
investment into renewable energy - such as wind, solar and geothermal 
(extracting heat from the earth's interior) sources. 
*	Agribusiness, including the pharmaceutical companies, to be taken into public 
ownership. 
*	For a food processing and retail industry under workers' control to ensure that 
standards are set by consumers, farm workers and small farmers.
 
Rights
*	Defend the right to asylum. 
*	End police harassment. For the abolition of the Criminal Justice Act. Scrap the 
so-called 'Terrorism' Act. No curtailment of jury trials. 
*	Fight to end discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, sexuality, disability, 
age, and all other forms of prejudice.
 
International and the military
*	No to the occupation of Iraq! Bring the troops home now. 
*	Abolish third world debt. For the neo-colonial countries to refuse to pay. 
*	Abolish the IMF and the World Bank. 
*	Scrap all nuclear weapons. For an immediate and drastic cut in military 
spending worldwide. A global campaign against chemical and biological 
weapons. 
*	Total opposition to Nato. No to a European army.
 
Fight for socialist change
*	For a socialist confederation of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland. 
*	For solidarity of the European working class. Oppose the bosses' European 
Union. No to the euro. For a socialist Europe. 
*	Take into public ownership the top 150 companies, banks and building 
societies that dominate the economy, under democratic working-class control 
and management. Compensation to be paid on the basis of proven need. 
*	Campaign to form a new mass party of the working class. 
*	An end to the rule of profit. For a socialist plan of production. For a socialist 
society and economy run to meet the needs of all whilst protecting our 
environment. 
 
Vote for a socialist alternative
In Britain every year 200,000 babies - one third of all those born - are born into 
poverty. In total 9.7 million people live below the poverty line. Millions more struggle 
to get by, increasingly having to take two or more jobs just to make ends meet
Vote for a socialist alternative
In Britain every year 200,000 babies - one third of all those born - are born into 
poverty. In total 9.7 million people live below the poverty line. Millions more struggle 
to get by, increasingly having to take two or more jobs just to make ends meet.
Seven years ago, when New Labour was elected, there was widespread hope that 
working-class peoples' lives would improve.
 After 18 years of Tory privatisation, cuts and job losses, New Labour was expected 
to be different.
Nothing could have been further from the truth. New Labour, like the old 
Tories before, consistently takes measures that make life harder for 
working people.
Cuts and privatisation
In New Labour's Britain privatisation rules. And privatisation of our public services is 
undermining our quality of life.
The government claim that privatisation can offer good public services. This 
is baloney.
Private companies exist to make a profit. They will only invest if they think they can 
make money. When they invest in our public services, their profits are coming from 
the taxes we've paid. That means money is being transferred directly from our 
services into the fat cats' pockets.
Not just from our services, but from those of future generations. Private Finance 
Initiative (PFI) is mortgaging the future; it commits our children and grandchildren to 
continue paying the profiteers for many decades to come.
If you're denied a hospital bed, if your education services are cut, if your libraries are 
closed then chances are it's because big business has decided it can't make enough 
money. Privatisation means massive risk-free profits for the fat cats and poor public 
services for us.
Only 11% of people support privatisation, yet New Labour just keeps selling off the 
family silver. Now even the army is being privatised - Halliburton, US vice-president 
Dick Cheney's favourite company, now employs and trains members of the British 
army!
Low pay
At the same time as our services are being cut and privatised, we have to 
work longer hours, in more casual jobs, often for less pay.
The decimation of manufacturing industry has continued apace under New Labour - 
an average of 400 jobs a day has been lost over the last two years alone.
They are being replaced by lower-paid service jobs - for example, more than 
400,000 people now work in call centres. But even these jobs are under threat as big 
business tries to lower wages by moving jobs abroad.
Nonetheless, while there are still pockets of severe unemployment in Britain, at the 
moment, most working-class people can get work - but not work that pays us a 
living wage.
Most of us get by only by relying on credit or, as it is otherwise known, debt. The 
ratio of household debt to pre-tax income now stands at 120%, its highest ever 
level.
 
Crime
New Labour claims to be 'tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime'. It 
is neither.
It is true that record numbers of people are being locked up, many for crimes of 
poverty, such as inability to pay extortionate council tax bills (On the other hand, 
Hans Rausing, the richest man in Britain, receives more in government rebates than 
he pays in taxes.)
Yet Blunkett's, and now Clarke's, draconian policies have not prevented an increase 
in violent crime.
The Socialist Party is opposed to all criminal and anti-social behaviour, and supports 
democratic community action to tackle these problems.
It is working-class communities, young and old, that bear the brunt of crime. The 
super-rich have always been able to protect their homes and goods with 
sophisticated security measures. Now they can go one better and 'rent a cop'!
Several police forces, while complaining about being under-staffed, are renting out 
their services to the rich. In Devon and Cornwall, for example, you can have a 
constable for £350 a day or a chief inspector for £365.
Meanwhile many ordinary people no longer bother to phone the police when they are 
burgled, because they know that nothing will be done.
At the same time, in working-class communities throughout Britain, nothing is being 
done to provide young people with the hope of a decent future - a good education, a 
good job and a decent home.
Youth clubs and other facilities are being closed down. Yet there is no doubt that the 
provision of such basic rights would prevent the vast majority of a new generation 
being sucked into crime.
The Socialist Party is fighting for
*	The right to a high quality training, job and/or college place for 
every school leaver. 
*	The right to free education for all, from the cradle to the grave. 
*	For a minimum wage of £8 an hour for all. No exemptions. 
*	Democratic community action to tackle crime. 
*	Cut across drug-related crime and the power base of organised 
crime by providing treatment, maintenance and counselling 
facilities for all heroin addicts, including support services for 
their families. 
*	Treatment centres to be established with the agreement of the 
local community, treating addicts from the local area, with a 
proper monitoring system for the local community. 
*	Community control of the police to ensure they work with and 
implement the policing priorities advocated by the 
communities. 
 
Work 'til we drop... the great pensions 
robbery
The pension rights of the majority of the British workforce are under attack.
Unless you're a judge, an MP or a fat cat chief executive of a FTSE 100 company 
then the chances are you've either had your pension rights cut or are facing an 
attack on those entitlements.
While people should be allowed to work past retirement age if they want to do so, 
the current trend to force people to work into old age is a disgrace.
The state pension is a pittance on which it is impossible to live with the 
dignity that pensioners deserve after a lifetime of work.
In the private sector companies have been ripping off their workers by eroding their 
pension entitlements for years. By ending the final salary pension schemes and 
taking contributions holidays, the bosses have saved themselves over £20 billion 
since 1987 in reduced contributions.
Now the government plans to get in on the act. By increasing the retirement age, 
ending final salary schemes in some sectors and increasing employee contributions 
the government hopes it can cut the costs of pensions in the public sector by 15-
20%; probably robbing over £100,000 billion from workers.
The Socialist Party is fighting for a living pension for all and fully supports 
the struggle by public sector workers to defend their pensions from attack.
Things only get worse...
Recently research hit the headlines because it claimed that, taking all factors into 
account - such as levels of stress, standard of living and environmental hazards - 
1976 was the best year of our lives!
Maybe that isn't true, but it is true that in 1976 children were expected to have a 
better a life than their parents before them. Today, by contrast, parents are worried 
about how their children will survive in a world without free education and with a 
crumbling health service.
A world where housing costs are extortionate, jobs are low paid and insecure, and 
any prospect of a decent pension seems to be disappearing down the plughole. The 
last 30 years may have brought us a vast array of new technology, but they have 
left us more overworked and insecure about our future.
But it doesn't have to be this way...
After decades of the drip, drip of ceaseless cuts eating away at our living conditions 
like acid on metal, it could seem that we have no choice but to accept our lot.
After all every mainstream party - New Labour, the Tories and the Liberal Democrats 
- stand for the same diet of cuts and privatisation.
On a local level, where they run local councils they are all cutting our public services 
to the bone, often combined with dramatically increased rates of council tax.
Nationally, they are attempting to outbid each other for who can privatise most if 
they win the next general election.
In the privatisation race the Tories have a narrow lead, going even further than New 
Labour with their plans for the outright privatisation of health and education, but 
New Labour is not far behind.
And the Liberal Democrats, who previously posed as being 'nicer' than the other two 
big parties, are now neck-and-neck with New Labour with their plans to privatise 
prisons, the royal mint, and several other services that New Labour hasn't got round 
to yet!
The rich get richer...
But we do not have to accept the meagre lot currently on offer.
Britain is officially the fourth richest country on the planet.
And for a few at the top Britain is truly booming. Executive pay rose by 23% in 2003, 
compared to an average of 3.6%.
Most people's pension entitlement may be in crisis but it is very different for the 
super-rich.
Last year, for example, the chief executive of Aviva (Norwich Union) saw his 
pension pot rise to £5.6million; the top man at Legal & General saw his rise 
to £8.2million - on top of their £1million salaries.
A few years ago it was estimated that Britain's 1,000 wealthiest men and women had 
over £108 billion stashed away!
It is not a lack of wealth that has resulted in 25 years of cuts.
 The policies of all the mainstream parties are dictated by the interests of the big 
corporations that dominate the British economy.
Tony Blair recently boasted that the World Bank had described Britain as being 
among the most "lightly regulated" countries in the world.
In other words big business can do pretty much whatever it likes.
And big business in the 21st century is driven more completely than ever by the 
short-term desire for the maximum possible profits - so for them public services can 
never be too paltry, or wages too low - because the less we have, the more profits 
they make.
So while the government has no problem spending money (for example current costs 
for the occupation of Iraq are running at £5 million a day) it does everything it can to 
resist spending money on improving our living conditions - because it is not in the 
interests of big business.
This is the brutal logic of the system we live under, capitalism.
Fighting back
But we do not have to accept that logic.
Across Britain workers - such as benefit and job centre workers and nursery nurses 
in Scotland - have been forced to take strike action over pay.
Now public sector workers are having to take action over pensions.
The Socialist Party stands in solidarity with all those workers fighting to 
defend or improve their pay and conditions.
Within the trade unions our members, including the 18 currently serving on trade 
union national executives, campaign for union leaderships which are prepared to 
fight on their members' behalf.
The Socialist Party also campaigns as part of local communities against cuts and 
closures in our services.
If we put up a fight it is possible to win victories, like the campaigners in 
Southampton who have just saved their local leisure centre, to give just one 
example amongst many.
 
For a socialist alternative
The Socialist Party is fighting for every possible improvement in working-class 
people's lives, but we recognise that under this profit-hungry capitalist system, we 
will always face a constant struggle to defend our living conditions.
That is why we are fighting for socialist change.
We don't want the kind of regimes that existed in the Soviet Union and Eastern 
Europe which, while they were based on a planned economy, were completely 
undemocratic.
Socialism can only work with the fullest democracy. We want real socialism 
- a democratic society and economy run to meet the needs of all instead of 
the profits of a few.
Based on co-operation and equality, socialism would lay the basis for an end to 
poverty and all forms of discrimination and oppression.
For the Socialist Party's election programme see above.
 
No to the BNP!
The far-right, racist British National Party (BNP) claims that it is on the side of 
working people.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The BNP is a racist party that lays the blame for the problems local communities face 
- poor housing, privatisation and council service cuts - at the door of ethnic 
minorities and asylum seekers.
This is easy for the BNP, after all, the government and the tabloid press use the 
same kind of propaganda.
The leader of the BNP called Blunkett his "best recruiting sergeant".
By whipping up racism the BNP diverts blame from the real culprits for the problems 
of working-class communities - big business, the government and local councils.
Whenever the BNP has been elected it has done nothing to fight for the local 
people it claims to represent.
In Burnley, the BNP councillors didn't even turn up to the council meeting where 
council tax rises and £1 million worth of cuts were voted through.
In Stoke, BNP councillors voted in favour of a dramatic rise in council tax equal to 
almost double inflation. The BNP even opposes the right of workers to take strike 
action and so condemned the firefighters' strike in 2002.
It is not enough for anti-racists just to condemn the BNP's record of racism, 
prejudice and hatred.
We need to offer a clear socialist alternative based on working class unity.
New Labour's Tory policies of cuts and privatisation boost support for the BNP whilst 
the government's attacks on the right to asylum for refugees fleeing torture, 
repression and war help make the BNP look more legitimate and respectable.
The campaign to stop the BNP must expose its real agenda but, more importantly, 
offer a positive alternative including mass community and trade union campaigns to 
improve council services, stop cuts and privatisation and prepare the way for a new 
mass workers' party to genuinely represent working people.
 
No to the occupation of Iraq!
"We want democracy...to succeed. And we know it cannot succeed so long 
as [this country] is occupied by a foreign power."
George W Bush talking about the Lebanon (March 2005)!
On February 15, 2003, the Socialist Party marched against the imminent war on 
Iraq, alongside almost 2 million others in Britain, and over 30 million worldwide.
But despite the biggest simultaneous worldwide movement in history - Bush and 
Blair went ahead and invaded Iraq.
On the Socialist Party's leaflet of that day, we warned:
"There has never been a war so blatantly about the prestige and profit of 
imperialism. Saddam Hussein is a vicious dictator but that isn't why Bush wants rid 
of him...It should be for the people of Iraq to overthrow Saddam. If US imperialism 
does it, they will not replace him with genuine democracy but with a puppet in the 
US interest.
"[Bush's] so-called war on terrorism is designed to allow US imperialism to increase 
their dominance of the world. Their primary motivation for war on Iraq, as British 
cabinet ministers have admitted in private, is oil."
We went on to warn that Blair's support for this war would inevitably increase the 
likelihood of a major terrorist attack in Britain, and that Iraq would face a future of 
occupation and conflict.
Unfortunately, everything predicted by the Socialist Party and others in the 
anti-war movement has come to pass.
Iraq is sinking deeper into chaos, its people are mired in even worse conditions than 
existed under Saddam.
The recent undemocratic elections have solved nothing. On the contrary they have 
made the situation worse. Those who voted in the elections hoped it would mark the 
start of a process of troop withdrawal.
But the US is intent on keepings its huge military presence in order to 
defend its interests.
At the same time the overwhelming majority of Sunni Muslims boycotted the 
elections and fear becoming a persecuted minority.
This is a recipe for division, further bloodshed and even all-out civil war.
However, it is wrong to conclude that therefore the occupation has to continue. The 
blame for the current situation lies at the feet of the warmongers.
The 'coalition of the willing' is not in Iraq to bring peace, but to further the interests 
of US imperialism. To do so they are balancing between the different religious and 
ethnic groups. This, as has always been the case with imperialist occupations, tends 
to massively exacerbate the tensions.
The solution lies with the working people and poor masses of Iraq. The only way to 
guard against ethnic and religious clashes would be through the formation of multi-
ethnic defence forces to protect the security of all, under the democratic control of 
working people.
The Socialist Party stands for such measures to be combined with a mass movement 
of the working class and the oppressed masses for an end to the occupation of Iraq.
Such a movement should call for the convening of an Iraq-wide national assembly of 
democratically elected delegates to vote on the formation of a workers and poor 
farmers' government that would provide the basis to deal with the crushing problems 
facing Iraq.
The Socialist Party is campaigning to build the movement against the 
occupation.
How many more Iraqi people and coalition soldiers will have to spill their blood for 
the greed and prestige of Bush and his international allies? A majority of people in 
the US and Britain now oppose their government's war on Iraq.
The occupation must end now and the Iraqi people be given the freedom to 
decide their own future.
 
Time to change things - we need a new party
Since New Labour was elected the number voting in elections has gone into 
sharp decline.
All kind of gimmicks have been tried to reverse the trend - including postal or even 
internet voting.
However, even if Blair goes as far as Vladimir Putin did in Russia (who offered free 
cinema tickets to people if they voted in the last election!) it will not solve the 
problem.
People aren't voting because there is no-one they want to vote for.
But not voting will not stop our public services being butchered. Nor will it stop our 
government supporting US imperialism's barbaric war and occupation for oil. What is 
needed is someone working people can vote for - a completely different kind of 
political party - a party that is made up of ordinary working-class people and which 
fights for their interests.
Today, more than ever before, working-class people need a party that will stand 
shoulder to shoulder with them, that will fight to defend them against the billionaires 
who run this society for profit instead of people's needs.
In this election the Socialist Party is standing to offer a socialist alternative 
in upwards of fifteen seats around the country.
We are standing are standing as part of the Socialist Green Unity Coalition which will 
contest up to thirty seats. We appeal to you to join us and to help build the socialist 
opposition to New Labour.
Our party has a long and proud record of struggling to defend working-class people. 
For example, in 1990 we led the battle against the poll tax which successfully 
brought down Margaret Thatcher and defeated the tax.
We are involved in hundreds of campaigns up and down the country, including the 
fight against privatisation, for better pay, to stop council house sell-offs, for free 
education, against the war in Iraq and to stop the pollution of our environment.
As well as these day-to-day struggles, we also fight for socialist change.
In the last three years we have had Socialist Party councillors elected in Coventry 
and Lewisham, in London.
We also support other genuine socialists and anti-cuts and anti-privatisation 
candidates.
At the same time we campaign for the founding of a new party - that brings 
together forces such as socialists, trade unionists and the anti-war 
movement - and puts forward a programme for the millions instead of the 
millionaires.
The trade unions in Britain donate millions of pounds to New Labour every 
year - yet it doesn't buy them one penny's worth of influence with the 
government.
We argue it would be far better to use that money to begin to build a new party.
For a workers' MP on a worker's wage
But we don't want a new party that ends up the same way as New Labour - 
putting the interests of big business first.
We would campaign for any new party representing workers to adopt a genuine 
socialist programme.
We would also argue that it adopt a policy that its elected representatives taken only 
the average wage of a skilled worker in the area they represent, so that they remain 
in touch with ordinary working people.
In the past, when we had three socialist MPs, they took only the average 
wage of a skilled worker.
Today, in Ireland, Socialist Party MP Joe Higgins also takes the average wage of a 
worker.
Even the tabloid press has felt compelled to describe him as a socialist 'that money 
can't buy'.
Joe Higgins recently proved his principles again when, along with thousands of local 
activists, he organised a campaign against the introduction of an unfair tax, the bin 
tax.
As a result of standing up for his principles and taking part in a peaceful protest, he 
and Socialist Party Councillor Clare Daly were sent to prison for a month by the Irish 
courts.

