Free Scotland Party

Constitution (1)

Constitution (2)

"A government elected by and answerable only to voters in Scotland!"
Free Scotland wants an Independent Scotland, independent of the UK. Free Scotland wants an Independent Scotland, independent of the EU.

National Manifesto 2005
Schoolhouse, Hamnavoe, Burra, Shetland, ZE2 9LA. 01595 859475 077 71 724 362 freescotlandparty@hotmail.com www.freescotlandparty.org

Grown up countries make their own decisions, Scotland should do the same Scottish decisions made in a Scottish Parliament by Scottish politicians answerable only to voters in Scotland!

Free Scotland says hold a 3 question referendum on EU issues Question 1 on the EU constitution Question 2 on the Euro Question 3 on withdrawal from the EU Free Scotland says vote NO to the EU Constitution Free Scotland says vote NO to the Euro Free Scotland says vote YES to withdrawal from the EU


Fishing
Local control!
Hand over control of Scottish fishing grounds to Scottish fishermen organisations and fish processors organisations Get the politicians out of fishing. Follow the lead of the successful fisheries in the North Sea in Norway, Iceland and the Faeroes, local control and not in the EU!.

Energy
Boost funding for tidal/wave power research, National guidelines in place for wind farms, Insulation grants, Nuclear power no way. Nuclear power is being pushed as a 'clean' option for future energy needs. Deal with waste in the producer country. Invest as much time and money and research into tidal and wave power as went into Nuclear power and then see what we can do The Scottish Executive really has to wake up to the issue of no national guidelines for wind farms. Wind power is not the full answer. Invest in tidal and wave research, our coastlines could be Scotland's greatest asset for future power generation. Tidal and wave technology is a chance for Scotland to get ahead Grants for insulation should be more readily available especially for pensioners The Highlands and Islands are ideally placed for producing environmentally friendly power but if we are serious about producing electricity in remote areas then the electrical infrastructure needed across Scotland has to be improved to be able to move electricity from where it is produced to where it is needed.

(www.freescotlandparty.org) was launched in Shetland on New Years Day 2004. Free Scotland wants out of the UK and out of the EU. We want decisions about Scotland made in Scotland. The Scottish Parliament is hamstrung in what it can do by interference from Brussels and from London. Scottish solutions for Scottish problems taken by Scottish politicians in a Parliament answerable only to voters in Scotland! When we were asked about joining the Common Market, did we vote to destroy fishing, for the Common Agricultural Policy, for the closing of the Scottish Steel industry, for the United States of Europe? No. Look to Norway! Not in the EU, discovers oil and gets richer. Look to Scotland! In the EU and the UK, discovers oil and gets poorer. Time to get out of the EU and UK! The EU is corrupt. The accounts have not been signed off for the last ten years. The EU is undemocratic. We elect MEPs whose function according to Iain MacWhirter in the Herald is to "heckle", they have no power. The EU is bureaucratic. Unelected civil servants implement the policies decided upon by Council of Ministers, heads of government who never put these policies to their electorate.

Free Scotland Party

Scotland should have
200 mile exclusive fishing border species quota negotiated locally local fishermen to close fishing grounds to protect breeding or immature fish an immediate end to by catch, what is caught is landed bigger mesh sizes to allow younger, smaller fish to escape and mature


