Cornish Assembly Now

CORNISH ASSEMBLY NOW! 
"We, the People of Cornwall, must have a greater say in how we are governed. We need a 
Cornish Assembly that can set the right democratic priorities for Cornwall and provide a stronger 
voice for our communities in Britain, in Europe and throughout the wider World." - Declaration 
signed by 50,000 people in 2000-2001 
In 2000, MK launched the Declaration for a Cornish Assembly campaign. In less than two years, 
this won the support of over 50,000 people, which equates to more than 10% of the Cornish 
electorate. As a party, we remain proud to have initiated this campaign, which gave the people of 
Cornwall the opportunity to so enthusiastically demand greater control over their own future. 
A Scottish Parliament, Assemblies for Wales and Northern Ireland and a London Authority have 
been established, but Cornwall remains the only Celtic nation within the British Isles to have no 
form of effective self-government. 
Labour's response has been to ignore the overwhelming public support for a Cornish Assembly. 
Instead, it has constructed a network of bogus unelected and unaccountable bodies such as the 
South West Regional Assembly and the South West Regional Development Agency, which have 
taken control over areas such as economic development, housing and strategic planning, further 
and further away from the communities of Cornwall. 
Mebyon Kernow's position is that the only region for Cornwall is Cornwall. We alone have 
consistently and clearly stated that vision. 
In addition, devolved government based on Cornwall would also create the space to allow the 
current functions of Cornwall Council to be devolved downwards - to councils that are based on 
local communities and can provide the grassroots of a living and participatory human scale 
democracy. 
Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall is the only political party 100% united in the campaign for 
a Cornish Assembly. 
We will:- 
* Set up a legislative Cornish Assembly with powers at least equal to those of the Scottish 
Parliament. 
* Withdraw from the South West Assembly and all other unelected quangos. 
* Create a range of democratically accountable Cornish institutions to work for the people of 
Cornwall, including a Cornish Development Agency and an independent Cornish university
Our Vision for Cornwall

We have a positive alternative built on four important cornerstones. Our alternative is Cornish, 
green, left-of-centre and decentralist. 
Committed to the self-determination of Cornwall, our platform is strongly based around those open 
and caring Cornish values of community, social justice and internationalism. 
We want a Cornwall that makes its own way in the world; a Cornwall whose inhabitants do not 
play down their own identity and which looks to its geography and history as strengths not 
weaknesses. But this Cornwall will not in any way be exclusive. 
Cornish identity and nationhood is not a racial issue. It is about a respect for life and culture, it is 
about living in Cornwall and having a positive commitment to the future of Cornwall. 
To outlaw all forms of discrimination, Mebyon Kernow is committed to a wide-ranging Bill of Rights 
that will protect all the people in our communities - regardless of gender, age, health, religion, 
national or ethnic origin, or sexuality. 
Our vision for Cornwall and the world is underpinned by a respect for the diversity of the planet, 
both the diversity of human cultural traditions such as our languages and the diversity of 
environments and species - all of which must be protected and enhanced for future generations. 
That is why Mebyon Kernow has a proud record of working with allies in the European Free 
Alliance on such internationalist issues as culture, language, civil rights, the environment and 
peace issues. 
The second cornerstone of Mebyon Kernow philosophy is our Green commitment. 
The economic and environmental crises which affect the world today are global and will require 
the creation of a truly global consciousness to deal with them and work towards a sustainable 
economy. Conventional political approaches, rooted in the addiction to constant economic growth 
are not acceptable, because they are unsustainable. The "business as usual, but paint it green" 
approach is equally unacceptable. 
Mebyon Kernow strongly believe that radical changes to the basis of our lives and our lifestyles 
must be made now, to create a more decentralised and self-sufficient economy, with a 
decentralisation of both economic activity and political processes. 
This transformation to a sustainable economy will involve critical decisions and initiatives at both 
world-wide and European levels (for example, tackling ozone depletion, world hunger and Third 
World trade), but action at a local level is also vitally important. 
Wholesale changes in peoples' lifestyles need to be promoted and new policies must be launched 
that are aimed at cutting energy consumption and large-scale pollution, while at the same time 
encouraging more environmentally sound measures such as alternative energy technologies, 
organic farming and a green integrated transport system. 
In Britain today, there has been a discernible drift to the right in political parties. Mebyon Kernow 
refuses to follow this line and is not afraid to state that it is Left-of-Centre. We believe that 
government has a responsibility to intervene to tackle poverty and inequality in our society 
wherever it can. 
Mebyon Kernow is committed to a just and fair society. We will never accept the current trend of 
blaming the poor for their poverty, condemning the sick for the strain on the under-funded health 
service, or punishing the unemployed and small businesses for the incompetence of the 
government. 
We are opposed to the privatisation of our community assets to wealthy private investors. We 
believe that energy, water, rail and vital communications should be publicly owned and publicly 
accountable. 
All people must be enabled to fulfil their full potential in life. This can only be achieved by allowing 
free and equal access to all education, welfare and healthcare services in society, all of which 
should be based in the community.
The principle of subsidiarity must be properly invoked to allow decisions to be taken at the most 
relevant and local level of government as possible. Power must be given to Cornwall as a national 
community and to all our local communities, so that local people can be empowered to take more 
responsibility for the quality of life in their communities - a "bottom-up" approach to government 
rather than the present "top-down" approach. 
Decisions must not be imposed on communities by remote and unaccountable agencies, but 
influenced and changed by members of those communities affected. This localisation of political 
powers and decision-making will help enable and encourage self-reliant and self-sufficient 
community development. 
A legislative Cornish Assembly is needed now for greater Cornish self-government. 
A Historic Celtic Nation

Cornwall has a well developed and unique identity, grounded 
in its culture, language, traditions, history and distinct 
constitutional position. This forms the bedrock of the growing 
support for greater Cornish self-government. 
Cornwall is one of the six Celtic nations; the others being 
Brittany, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland and Wales. These 
five nations are becoming more confident in their own identities 
- Ireland is pushing its case at the centre of Europe while 
Wales and Scotland have won their own assembly and 
parliament. 
They are using their identities as strong political tools - to 
deliver greater democracy to their people, strengthen their 
local economies and give them a confidence for the future. 
Cornwall meanwhile suffers because central government 
refuses to accept Cornwall as an entity in its own right. Cornish 
institutions are linked to those of Devon and the wider south 
west, destroying our identity and damaging our economy. 
Our identity could be our greatest asset, nourishing a real 
sense of place and purpose, providing a unifying element for 
the whole population of Cornwall. But this identity must be 
supported and reinforced. 
The London-based parties (Conservatives, Labour and Liberal 
Democrats) have failed Cornwall. They have collectively tied 
Cornwall into south west bodies where our Cornish voice is 
submerged, they have imposed ill-conceived and 
unsustainable policies that take no account of the unique 
nature of Cornwall and refused to devolve political and 
economic power to our nation. 
We must send unambiguous signals to Westminster and 
Brussels. We must take every chance to make the Cornish 
case - loudly and consistently - and to demand the decoupling 
of the institutional merger with parts of SW England. 
_________________________________ 
Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall believes that we have 
a duty to future generations to foster our distinct identity and 
cultural traditions. 
The Cornish language (Kernewek) is the most obvious 
example of the identity of Cornwall and it must be available to 
all who want to learn it. Although covered by the Council of 
Europe's Charter for Regional and Minority Languages, 
appropriate levels of government investment in the language's 
future has not been forthcoming. MK remains the only political 
party committed to investment in our national language, both 
for the training of language teachers and the provision of 
courses for all ages. 
Mebyon Kernow is also committed to a National Curriculum for 
Cornwall, that ensures subjects such as Cornish history, 
culture and language are taught in all local schools. 
 
  

 
 

 
 
Advanced Search 




 

 
Leadership Team 
 
National Executive 
 
MK Councillors
  



 

 
 printable version 






Economy

Cornwall has long been a marginalised part of an over-centralised state. It is well known for low 
pay and chronic out-migration, while the Cornish economy continues to lag behind that of the rest 
of the United Kingdom. Our gross domestic product per head is only 62% of the UK average. 
These economic problems are accompanied by population growth as fast as, or faster than, 
anywhere else in Britain. This inevitably means rates of consumption of our natural environment 
that are clearly unsustainable. Cornwall is unique in this combination of development pressures 
and chronic economic problems, but policy makers ignore this uniqueness and Cornwall does not 
have the institutions to remedy the problems it faces. 
The situation is made even worse by the policy failure of the 'south west' project. This imposed 
merger of Cornwall in south west economic agencies has failed to solve Cornwall's economic 
problems, failed to produce the policies needed for distinct problems and failed to defend the 
interests of the Cornish economy. Instead its spokespersons merely repeat the same lame and 
simplistic 'policies' - build more roads, accommodate more in-migrants, attract more tourists. 
Continuing these policies, as well as locking us into a peripheral economy over-dependent on 
tourism and producing insecure and fragile employment opportunities, also leads in the long term 
to unacceptable environmental degradation. 
The benefits of the south west policy are felt east of the Tamar. Jobs are exported eastwards, as 
big businesses based in Plymouth and Exeter guarantee their market base. In the 1980s and 
1990s, Cornwall lost millions of pounds of potential grant aid because it was tied to Devon and not 
recognised in its own right and now even control of the emergency services has been centralised 
away from Cornwall. 
In March 1999, due to the continuing structural decline of the local economy, Cornwall was 
belatedly awarded Objective One status. But even this programme is still being controlled from 
outside Cornwall. MK is committed to Cornish democratic control over this funding and the future 
direction of the Cornish economy. 
Cornwall needs its own Development Agency, which if funded on a parity with the Welsh 
Development Agency, would represent a fresh start for Cornwall. Such funding would begin to 
recompense Cornwall for the damage caused in the twentieth century through regarding Cornwall 
as England's resort periphery. Such a CDA would be responsible for all the current functions at 
present dispersed among a confusing number of south west agencies. Above all, unlike the 
current quangos, it would be democratically accountable.
Accompanying a CDA there must be a range of Cornwall-based institutions including a Cornish 
Training and Skills Council and a Cornish Small Business Service to work in partnership with the 
predominantly small and medium sized businesses of Cornwall, a properly funded, independent 
and locally accountable Cornish University, European regional status and devolution of political 
decision-making to a Cornish Assembly. With these institutions in place Cornish communities will 
have the tools needed to confront the global economy. Without them Cornwall will become a 
leisure backwater, a place of early retirement, yet blighted by poverty, with an increasingly tawdry 
and ruined environment and a lost heritage. 
These institutions would be geared to mobilise indigenous resources, support existing businesses 
and agriculture and fishing, develop maritime communications, manufacturing industry and local 
economic activity. 
Mebyon Kernow believes that economic regeneration for Cornwall has two main parts; first, the 
development of indigenous enterprise to build a strong self-reliant economy and second, 
appropriate, environmentally acceptable inward investment. We believe that the local economy 
must be developed in a sustainable way, to create the foundation for both a strong, thriving and 
self-reliant community and an ecologically sustainable economy 
Environment

"More people than ever suffer poverty, hunger, environmental devastation, war and repression. 
Globalisation has surged forward. The gap between rich and poor grows wider every day. Climate 
change continues unabated. Vital bio-diversity resources are being dangerously depleted. A study 
published by the National Academy of Sciences in June 2003 showed that human beings are 
using about 25% more natural resources than the Earth can replenish. Over a billion people are 
still without clean drinking water. More than 8% of children born in developing countries die before 
their first birthday. The poorest 40% of people have access to a mere 11% of the world's 
resources." Plaid Cymru MEP Jill Evans 
There is a reality. We live in a world of great inequality, with considerable wealth in many Western 
countries, offset by abject poverty in the less developed countries. We also live in a world facing 
real environmental crises, with threats from global warming, acid rain, ozone depletion and the 
continuing decline in bio-diversity. 
Unsustainability is truly global and will need action at worldwide as well as local levels. To achieve 
real sustainability we must foster radical changes to every aspect of our lives - how we live, how 
we consume, etc., to rebuild sustainable and equitable communities. That means decisive action 
by governments as well by individuals. 
Mebyon Kernow is committed to strong environmental measures, to promote real sustainability 
and equity throughout the world, both North and South. These include:- 
* Implementation of a strengthened Kyoto Protocol and a strong campaign to persuade all 
countries to sign up to it. 
* Support for all initiatives to tackle global poverty through the cancellation of third world debt, 
increased aid to the developing world and an end to unfair trade rules. 
* New policies aimed at cutting energy consumption and pollution, while at the same time 
encouraging more environmentally sound measures, such as:- 
Integrated transport policy with improved public transport and rail services. More freight on rail and 
the increased transport of people and goods by sea. 
Alternative energy technologies, for which Cornwall is ideally placed, and to end present reliance 
on fossil fuels and nuclear power.
* A decentralised, self-reliant and sustainable economy which provides local needs as locally as 
possible, within an awareness of global environmental problems. A local economy would reduce 
levels of long-distance travel and reduce dependence on imports, and provide the basic framework 
for a sustainable society. 
* Opposition to genetically modified crops. 
* Destruction of all nuclear weapons. 
* A zero waste strategy aiming at the elimination of landfilling and incineration, which invests in the 
radical reduction of waste generated by industry, business and households and increases reuse 
and recycling. This will aid the economy by increasing business efficiency and enabling Cornwall 
to promote itself as among the worlds leading Green economies. 
Europe

Mebyon Kernow is an internationalist and outward-looking political party. We are pro-European 
and reject the inward-looking agenda and jingoistic rhetoric of groups like UKIP. There is nothing 
positive about their attempts to foster division and disunity throughout Europe. 
It is our belief that nations and regions throughout the World should work together to foster global 
peace and stability. Indeed, the strongest argument for working together in Europe remains the 
two World Wars which ripped the continent apart. 
But that does not mean we are uncritical of how the EU is presently constituted. MK along with 
many other progressive groups is campaigning for the increased democratisation of the EU, 
greater transparency and increased Cornish representation. 
The Europe of today is one of centralisation, limited democratic control, big business and 
bureaucracy. These priorities are utterly wrong and European fishing and farming policies have 
failed largely through the intransigence and incompetence of state governments. 
Mebyon Kernow believe that sovereignty resides with the people, and that responsibility for 
decision-making should be retained at the most local level possible. Our compelling task is to build 
a decentralised Europe on this basic principle, which means we must limit the centralisation of 
powers both to Europe and to the current state capitals such as London and Paris. We must 
create a new Europe that is relevant to the needs of ordinary people. 
In Mebyon Kernow's Europe of regions and historic nations, Cornwall, Wales, etc, would have a 
greater say in how they are governed, and would also send their own representatives to Europe in 
place of the indifferent ministers from London. 
Mebyon Kernow is committed to:- 
* A democratic and accountable Europe, with a clear division of responsibilities between the 
different levels of government, according to the principle of subsidiarity. 
* A Europe that works for the Peoples of Europe, not big business. 
* A Europe of the Regions. The enormous cultural diversity of Europe is a strength which must be 
guarded, enhanced and harnessed through a constitutional recognition of its historic cultural and 
social regions such as Cornwall. 
* A Europe that uses its immense economic and political power to promote social, economic and 
political justice throughout the world. 
Farming and fishing

The future of Cornwall's rural and coastal communities are under threat from urban-based 
government, inappropriate farming and fishing policies from the EU and the financial muscle of the 
supermarkets. Job opportunities are still limited, the number of rural village shops and post offices 
has fallen markedly in recent years and young people are being forced out of their home towns 
and villages because of the inflated price of housing. 
Farming and fishing are in crisis. Both the Common Agricultural Policy and Common Fisheries 
Policy have not worked and need to be consigned to the dustbin of history. 
The CAP has failed farmers in less favoured areas, specifically supported grain production at the 
expense of livestock and made agriculture unpopular in the eyes of many people. London 
governments also need to recognise that agriculture is more than just another industry. Farmers 
are responsible for the protection and enhancement of the countryside and the well-being of rural 
communities. But the BSE crisis under the Tories and foot and mouth under Labour shows how 
central government does not understand the needs of rural areas. 
Many farming enterprises have been driven to ruin while the supermarkets and their suppliers are 
using their virtual monopoly of the market to push down the prices of goods from primary 
producers, wrecking the viability of family farm after family farm. Elected governments cannot 
stand aside and do nothing. They must use their muscle to press supermarkets to pay fair prices 
for produce that they resell. Mebyon Kernow is committed to legislation and windfall taxes on this 
issue. 
The countryside needs action and investment to prevent the break-up and amalgamation of farms. 
MK is committed to defending small and medium sized units as family farm units, and support 
packages to encourage the entry of young people into farming. 
The Common Fisheries Policy has failed to safeguard the local industry, with the interests of 
Cornish fishermen squandered as a bargaining chip at the roulette wheel of negotiations between 
the member states. The number of local fishermen has fallen drastically and the whole fabric of 
communities such as Newlyn have changed beyond recognition. 
If there is to be a future for the Cornish fishing industry, there can only be one realistic way 
forward. There must be a regional fishing policy, hammered out by delegates sent by fishermen 
from all parts of Europe, with each region having control over its own fishery. The fishermen of 
Cornwall must have direct representation when stock management issues are discussed and 
decided. 
Decisions must be fashioned by those areas affected, not imposed on communities by distant 
governments. MK is also committed to setting up a well-funded body to investigate ways of 
increasing the amount of processing of fish taking place in Cornwall. 
Housing

Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall believes that individuals and families have a 
fundamental right to good quality and affordable housing. We also hold the view that local people 
should be able to purchase homes in their own communities. But such rights are being denied to a 
whole generation of young people because of a housing market that is out of control and the 
inadequate provision of affordable housing. 
Families in Cornwall have the lowest incomes in Britain while house prices are rocketing due to 
market forces, leaving a clear mismatch between local wages and house prices. When Labour 
came to power the average cost of a house in Cornwall was less then £65,000. In the final quarter 
of 2004, that cost was approximately £200,000. 
There is no lack of housing in Cornwall, but young people have been excluded from the housing 
market and many coastal villages have become little more than havens for holiday makers.
* Set up a Cornish Housing Board, democratically accountable to the people of Cornwall, which 
would devise the strategy for housing provision in Cornwall.
* Only allow housing developments which could demonstrate a local need through an 'assessment 
of community need and acceptability.' 
* Increase the number of affordable homes for local people, through strict new planning 
regulations and greatly increased financial support for Housing Associations, other social 
landlords and councils to rebuild a public rented sector and invest in more partial ownership 
schemes. 
* Increase loans to first-time buyers through a greatly enhanced HomeBuy scheme. 
* Introduce planning restrictions to stop and then reverse the spread of second 'homes.' Planning 
permission would be needed to turn a family home into a second 'home' and if more than 5% of 
the housing stock in a particular settlement and/or parish were second 'homes,' no more would be 
allowed. 
* Introduce new planning rules to restrict such developments of 'holiday home' resorts such as that 
proposed at Carlyon Bay. 
* Institute a charter of ethical behaviour for estate agents, which includes restricting 
advertisements to the local area for the first three months. 
* Greater support for housing co-operatives and community land trusts. 
People

Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall has no vested 
interests. We are not funded by big business or the trade 
unions. Our priority is the people of Cornwall, their needs and 
aspirations. 
Many communities in Cornwall suffer real social deprivation, 
wages levels are low and public services receive less funding 
than in other parts of the UK. Children in Cornish schools 
receive £180 less per head than children elsewhere and 
Cornish communities have fewer police per head of population. 
Mebyon Kernow is committed to standing up for the ordinary 
people of Cornwall and winning a better deal for one and all . 
We will:- 
* Restore the link between pensions and wages, and increase 
the state pension to the EU average. 
* Guarantee free personal care for the elderly, the ill and the 
disabled. 
* Guarantee the right of the frail and vulnerable to care 
appropriate to their needs. 
* Guarantee the right of disabled people to play a full part in 
society. 
* Increase support for students. We are opposed to tuition and 
top-up fees, as introduced by Labour, support a return to 
grants for first degree courses and would reinstate the right of 
students to claim benefits such as housing benefit. 
* Help first-time buyers to gain access to affordable housing. 
* Guarantee the right of people to live in the community of their 
choice, without the threat of crime. 
We are concerned that many people are not claiming the 
benefits to which they are entitled, such as council tax benefit 
and tax credits. Mebyon Kernow would institute wideranging 
reforms to make sure that all citizens receive the benefits 
which are theirs by right.< sexes. both for age retirement equal 
an rights pension introduction immediate moves support also 
women. just not members, family all facilities childcare 
responsibilities care managing ways fairer employment access 
pay, on encouraging Act Equality comprehensive includes 
which equality, real legislation progressive advocate Kernow>
 
  

 
 

 
 
Advanced Search 




 

 
Leadership Team 
 
National Executive 
 
MK Councillors
  



 

 
 printable version 






Public Services

Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall stands for a society based on a genuine equality of 
opportunity, helping people to achieve their full potential in life but with a level of social protection 
to provide a real and tangible safety net. We believe that society should be judged by the way it 
looks after the vulnerable people in our local communities and provides those basic public services 
that we all need to prosper. 
MK is committed to a universal health service for the people of Cornwall which supplies the best 
possible healthcare free at the point of use. We deplore the policy of the present and recent 
governments which is turning the provision of a basic human right into an exercise in business 
management. Market forces have no place in our health service; decisions should always be taken 
for clinical rather than financial reasons. 
We are opposed to the government's focus on private investment and foundation hospitals, which 
increases inequality in healthcare provision. MK is also committed to the provision, by the state, of 
a just, proper and high quality education for all as of right. 
We do not support public funding of private institutions or the unequal funding of public 
educational institutions. Tory and Labour policies, which they claim lead to higher standards for all, 
are false and are leading to a two-tier education system. 
As a party, we have long maintained that important services such as energy, water and rail should 
be publicly owned and publicly accountable, based on community, social need and environmental 
protection rather than a private system based on profit. 
We are also opposed to public works being financed through the Public Finance Initiative or Public 
Private Partnerships, which are proving to be a bad deal for tax-payers. MK would discontinue 
such schemes in favour of sensible public investment which puts communities first. 
Mebyon Kernow is at the forefront of all campaigns opposing the ongoing erosion of important 
services away from Cornwall. It is our belief that Cornwall should be served by bodies based in 
Cornwall and employing local people. 
The people of Cornwall are presently fighting government plans to merge the control room of the 
Cornish Fire Service with those of the wider south west. Mebyon Kernow backs the local firemen 
and is committed to bringing all emergency services under local and democratic control. We are 
also the only political party committed to creating a Cornish police force.
Taxation

Mebyon Kernow is committed to effective public intervention to tackle evils in Cornish society such 
as unemployment and poor housing. This means that there is a need for a sufficient public 
resource and this in turn implies fair and redistributive taxation. 
But since 1979, there has been a major shift in taxation from direct to indirect taxation. Tory and 
Labour reforms have meant light taxes on wealth and profit, but a financial squeeze on the poor. 
Income tax cuts have resulted in disproportionate gains for the well off while at the same time 
increases in VAT have fallen hardest upon the poorest in society. In recent years, the impact of the 
ever-increasing rises in council tax on the less well-off has been especially severe. 
Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall is committed to redressing this imbalance. 
We are committed to fair taxation (both general and local) based on ability to pay, with increased 
spending to be partly funded by shifts in taxation onto the better-off. Mebyon Kernow is opposed to 
the iniquitous council tax and is campaigning for its replacement by a local income tax collected 
and retained in Cornwall. 
Tolerance

Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall believes that respect for individuals, communities and 
peoples should lie at the very core of the political philosophy of all progressive political 
movements. 
And yet, the 'pre-election' atmosphere of early 2005 has been characterised by the unsavoury 
spectacle of the two main London parties, and various rightwing groups, squabbling over the 
issues of immigration and asylum. 
Instead of working to promote tolerance and compassion in our society, they have preferred to 
focus on the intolerance spouted by the tabloid press for their own political advantage. 
We must all work towards real equality, which will benefit all society, eliminating out-dated 
attitudes and stereotypes, allowing all members of our communities the freedom to live their lives 
as they choose. 
Racism is an evil that can be found in all societies and Cornwall is no exception. Mebyon Kernow 
- the Party for Cornwall pledges full and unequivocal support for stiff sentences for race and hate 
crimes. There is no place in the Cornish community for any type of discrimination. 
World Affairs

The Campaign Against The Arms Trade has estimated that every minute the world will spend 
£1,000,000 on arms - while in the same time 15 children will die of poverty, famine or disease. 
In 1997, Labour promised an ethical foreign policy. Eight years on, it is a disgrace that the UK 
continues to be the second largest arms exporter in the world, with British taxpayers subsidizing 
this vile trade by £400 million a year. 
The UK also has a military spending budget of £27 billion. Such levels of spending cannot be 
justified and must be reduced, with investment redirected to positive and peaceful ventures. 
Mebyon Kernow - the Party for Cornwall support collectively agreed actions through the United 
Nations, but is opposed to the continuation of pro-nuclear military blocs such as NATO. We also 
oppose states who impose their will on other nations or minority groups throughout the world and 
spoke out against the military invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. 
We support all moves to end the international arms trade, which is having such a terrible impact 
on developing countries - keeping corrupt elites in power and fanning post-colonial conflicts. We 
have consistently advocated unilateral nuclear disarmament and the abolition of all biological and 
chemical weapons. 
We are committed to peace, with disarmament policies aimed at reducing nuclear proliferation, 
ending the international arms trade and limiting military spending. But peace is more than just an 
end to conflict between countries. It is about creating a time of real freedom, real co-operation 
and real social justice, a time in which all people and all communities can lead lives free of 
suspicion, prejudice and racism. 
Western democracies must also take their share of responsibility for the imbalances in the 
World's economy, much of which is caused by unfair trade between the rich north and the under-
developed south, as well as crippling debt repayments for poor countries. MK supports those 
campaigns such as Make Poverty History, which are campaigning for justice for the people of the 
developing countries. 
We believe that Third World debts should be written off. It is ridiculous that poor countries are 
being forced to destroy their environments and ransack their natural resources in a vain attempt 
to pay back such unfair debts. 
Aid must also be increased and targeted to allow people to become more self-reliant and solve 
their own problems. 
The British government is still failing to meet the UN's target of 0.7% of GNP for overseas aid. 
Mebyon Kernow is committed to the immediate implementation of this pledge. Trade that makes 
the developing countries more dependent must also be avoided and instead we should support 
real sustainable economic initiatives. 
 
 
 
 

