 
 
 
 
  
  
 
THE PERSONAL MANIFESTO OF
 
PARLIAMENTARY CANDIDATE FOR WYRE FOREST
    
GENERAL ELECTION 5 MAY 2005
The honour of being your Independent MP that you gave me at the last election has been a great 
privilege that I have appreciated deeply. I have tried to vote only when I have fully understood the 
matter under debate, and then to exercise wisely the opportunity of voting with the Government 
when I have believed them to be correct or at least to have the best proposals, and against them if I 
have believed that another Party offers the better option. 
 
I hope you will re-elect me to continue this unique opportunity of representing you as an 
Independent MP without the influence of a main political party whip. 
 
I have forged excellent links with local staff and executives in education, health, the 
police and at the County and District Councils and I hope to continue to use these for the 
benefit of all local people. 
 
Education  
 
Local schools 
 
After the trauma of the Wyre Forest review it is essential to make sure that the transition from the 
three-tier system to two tiers goes smoothly with as little disruption to the children's education as 
possible, and that the result of the change fulfils the predictions of those who voted for it that the 
quality and outcomes of education for all Wyre Forest children will improve. I am concerned for the 
future of staff of our closing schools and about the affordability of the extra buildings and facilities 
needed to accommodate the new system. 
 
I support the recent Parliamentary Health Select Committee Report on Obesity that recommended 
reformulation of the Food Technology curriculum, healthy eating in schools, Government guidance to 
schools on the use of vending machines, increased exercise through safer routes to walk or cycle to 
schools and recognition of obesity in children by weighing and measuring children annually. Several 
of these points have been given the Government's support in the recent Public Health White Paper. 
 
If re-elected I will continue to visit local schools to observe and discuss the progress of 
implementation of the transition and to discuss health issues, some of which are already being 
addressed.  
 
Wider issues affecting education 
 
Area Cost Adjustment 
During the last Parliament all local MPs were aware of the unfairness for Worcestershire children of 
the method of calculating area cost adjustment that leaves children in this county with less money 
per head for education than children over the borders in Shropshire or Birmingham. The unfairness 
occurs because Worcestershire has been labelled as a low-wage area. Work commissioned by the 
County Council has disproved this and so there is further ammunition to continue the battle by MPs 
to redress this intolerable situation after the election. 
 
City Academies 
Although I can see the attraction for schools that aspire to this status I fear that neighbouring 
schools could be disadvantaged in comparison. We need to study the proposals and their possible 
consequences very carefully before supporting the concept. 
 
School meals 
I welcome the Government announcement of Ј280 million to improve school meals. Believing that 
this might not be "new" money other than that already announced in allocations to Local Education 
Authorities, as has happened before with NHS "new" funding announcements, I checked this with 
the Schools Minister. To my relief Ј235 million of it is indeed "new" money for schools and LEAs 
from the Department's reserves. Primary schools will now be able to spend a minimum of 50p on 
ingredients and secondary schools 60p. The other Ј45 million comes from lottery money towards a 
new School Trust Fund to provide independent advice about healthy school meals.  
 
Exams 
I support all measures to improve learning in basic English and Maths whatever the system of 
examinations. I also welcome the move towards more vocational diplomas and the recognition that 
University Degrees should not be the only worthwhile aim of school education. 
 
Tuition Fees 
Let no one say a single vote never counts! At the tuition fees division in the House of Commons I 
was approached by Whips from both sides to know which way I was going to vote. In the end the 
majority in favour of these fees that will put students into vast debt before they can start earning 
was only five. I voted against tuition fees as I consider there are alternative ways of funding 
University training that would not put students into debt in this demoralising way. 
 
The future of education will be one of the key issues at this election. As an Independent candidate I 
have the privilege of supporting whichever of the proposals of major parties that I believe are right. 
 
Health Issues 
 
Locally, improvements in our hospital services are beginning. It is vital that I am still in the position 
to keep the pressure on the local Trust managers and clinicians. 
I will continue to press for: - 
• increased inpatient surgery. The people of Worcester and Redditch now recognise that their 
hospitals cannot cope with all the work thrown at them and are pressing for our hospital to do more 
of the work to relieve the pressure. 
• re-instatement of the midwife-led birth centre first to provide postnatal care and then, when 
shown to be safe as are similar units in Suffolk and Cumbria, to recommence normal deliveries for 
fit mothers. The necessary protocols for selection for admission and for dealing with the rare 
unexpected complication must be in place as they are at other birth centres. 
• a doctor in Kidderminster Hospital's urgent care centre for 24 hours per day so that the range of 
emergency patients assessed and treated locally can be increased. It is good that the merger of the 
minor injuries unit and the primary care centre means there is now a doctor in the unit out-of hours, 
but wholly unsatisfactory that there is still no doctor available during working hours. 
• a pharmacy at the hospital to supply urgent prescriptions for outpatients and day cases and drugs 
for the increasing numbers of inpatients soon to be admitted 
• improved continuity of care and communication between staff and patients in all hospitals we use.  
 
 
Nationally, I will continue to support the ideals of the National Health Service.  
 
• I welcome the extra funding going into the NHS if it is aimed at improving the NHS rather than 
increasing the involvement of the private sector.  
• I shall watch for problems of affordability that are expected to arise from the wholesale use of the 
private finance initiative in building new hospitals.  
• I shall point out when NHS hospitals face financial difficulties due to the diversion of funds to the 
private sector under unfair terms.  
• I welcome the Government white paper on public health and will follow developments carefully to 
make sure the Government is translating words into action for sickness prevention. 
• There have been more than twenty re-organisations of the NHS in the last twenty years. I will 
press for a period of stability and less interference with clinicians and managers so that they can 
concentrate on their job of caring for patients with emphasis on greater continuity of care and better 
communication with patients and families. Failings in these two aspects of care are the basis of most 
of the hospital complaints that I receive now. 
• I welcome the Government's drive for better consultation with patients and the public on health 
service changes and the aim to keep the NHS local assisted by local authority health overview and 
scrutiny committees and the Independent Reconfiguration Panel. All these changes were brought 
about in response to the electoral revolt by the people of Wyre Forest in 2001. I plan to continue to 
watch future hospital reconfigurations around the country none of which so far have been as severe 
or unfair as those that affected Kidderminster Hospital. 
• With the surprising and illogical proposal to abolish the Commission for Patient and Public 
Involvement in Health, patient forums will lose their national support and voice. I have already 
raised this potential disaster in the House of Commons and will oppose any legislation necessary for 
the abolition. 
 
Crime and the police 
 
Locally and nationally I shall continue to support investment to increase the visibility of police on our 
streets. I support the deployment of Community Support Officers (CSOs) to aid the police and 
believe that a bounty payable to members of the Special Constabulary on completing an agreed 
minimum number of hours duty per month would improve recruitment of these vital, volunteer 
members of our police forces. At the moment they have more powers than the CSOs, but no regular 
pay, and can frequently relieve full time uniformed officers for other duties. Increased police 
numbers are vital for crime prevention and the investigation of relatively minor offences that worry 
people intensely but may not achieve full investigation because of staff limitations. 
 
Capping by the Government of local authority, police and fire service precepts seems to me to go 
absolutely against the Government's stated aim of devolution of power. I shall continue to point this 
out and to push for greater freedom for these bodies to follow local priorities which they have 
researched in detail.  
 
The Environment 
 
I have supported Government Bills on Clean Neighbourhoods. The problem of chewing gum on 
pavements occurs nationwide and I hope that education and widespread awareness of the problem 
and the need to avoid it will preclude the expense of the complicated cleaning of our streets. 
 
I am a supporter of waste re-cycling and feel that the most effective way of doing this is to put the 
responsibility onto individual householders by limiting the volume of unsorted waste that can be 
collected. 
 
I am a keen bird watcher and will support methods of agriculture and countryside stewardship that 
promote the return of our declining species such as the skylark and lapwing. I support the work of 
local and national wildlife organisations and charities. 
 
Phone masts are a continued worry to many people and I will press for a critical, independent 
examination of all the evidence of their health risks so that planning decisions can be made based 
on firm evidence of risk. It is impossible ever to prove a complete absence of risk and hence we may 
have to accept a balance of probabilities but it would be wise always to seek sites for masts away 
from schools, nurseries and playgrounds. 
 
Global warming which is now recognised as a devastating reality has to be tackled. Britain's Kyoto 
target must be achieved before the deadline. 
 
Agriculture 
 
A major concern to farmers is the single farm payment that replaces the subsidies on crops and 
livestock. This will be based on acreage and the calculation is extremely complicated. I have raised 
in Parliament the problems facing sugar beet growers due to the proposed changes from Europe. 
Following the awful foot and mouth epidemic I raised the inadequate measures for the prevention of 
the import of illegal meat products that were so inferior to those in some other countries. Further 
investigation is now needed to know if these have improved. The worries about badgers and bovine 
tuberculosis continue and diversification remains an aim for many farmers but difficult for many to 
achieve.  
 
Business and Manufacturing 
 
Regular meetings with members of the Chamber of Commerce and visits to factories and offices 
have allowed me to talk to local businessmen and to learn of their need for a stable economy and 
their concerns with excessive regulation and red tape. I have raised several of these issues with 
Ministers. The huge advantage of being an MP is that one always gets an answer even if it is not 
always informative and helpful. 
 
Our successful manufacturing businesses have already discovered that innovation and technical 
excellence are essential to remain profitable in a world where cheaper labour costs appear to be 
current everywhere else. Other Governments, even in developed countries, appear to be more 
generous to their manufacturers. Our present Government appears to be too keen to follow 
European regulations to the letter. 
 
Transport and roads 
 
Using train services regularly I am well aware of the short comings of crowded, late or cancelled 
services. I would like to see a return to the days of a few high class train operators in competition 
who are also responsible for the track and line side equipment as I can remember the LMS, LNER, 
GWR and SR when one could rely on trains! It is only with increased reliability and lower fares due 
to greater efficiency that the motoring public will return to the trains in any numbers. 
 
Similarly bus services have to be made more attractive to change people's habits of using cars for 
short journeys. Free or reduced travel costs for Pensioners should be consistent across the country 
rather than varying from one local authority to another. 
 
Greatly improved public transport is the only way to discourage people from using their cars, and is 
preferable to the imposition of punitive fuel prices and tax levels. 
 
Although motorists dislike speed bumps they are effective in reducing speeds in crucial situations 
outside schools. The stricter enforcement of speed limits is expected to cut road deaths and 
confirmation of this over a longer period will encourage better compliance with speed limits. 
 
We need better road links to the motorway system as Bromsgrove and Droitwich, for example, use 
these to attract industrial development more easily than we do. The Stourport Road industrial 
corridor is our largest brown field site available for development but the cost of decontamination and 
the poor road links have to be overcome. I have approached and will continue to lobby Advantage 
West Midlands for much more help here than the Ј10,000 that we received for a feasibility study. 
 
The Stourport relief road is not a high priority with county planners and I believe that, whilst 
continuing to press for the full relief road, it is realistic to work on plans for lower cost stages of the 
road that could be afforded more easily one by one. 
 
Walking or cycling to work and to school should be encouraged by developing safer routes, and 
bringing into use more disused railways, canal tow paths and dedicated tracks, not just lined-off 
tracks on main roads for cyclists. A major study should be undertaken into how the walk to school 
can be made safer. 
 
Tourism and Retail 
 
In the Severn Valley Railway and the West Midlands Safari Park we already have two major tourist 
attractions, and with the developments around Weavers Wharf and the Kidderminster town centre 
Wyre Forest is becoming an attractive place for shoppers: we must encourage them to become 
tourists as well. 
 
To this end I have already held two meetings with representatives of the SVR and the Railway 
Museum, Bewdley Museum, Hartlebury Museum, the Kidderminster Carpet Museum Trust, the 
Churchill Forge and the District Council, and we are about to involve British Waterways in our work 
towards an Industrial Heritage Trail. We have all the components and with the renovation of the 
Stourport docks and Lichfield Basin, we could offer a fascinating tour for  
people who have finished their shopping and wish for a glimpse into the past of the carpet industry 
with a working Jacquard loom, the forerunner of the computer made of wood and card, steam 
railways, canals and docks, forest crafts and heavy metal work before modern power sources were 
available. 
 
All those working so hard for Opportunity Bewdley and Stourport Forward are to be congratulated on 
their vision and huge efforts to use the money available under the Market Towns initiative to the 
best advantage. 
 
I will support the improvements in Kidderminster around Comberton Hill, the Horsefair and Foley 
Park and all efforts to restore a cinema to the area. 
 
Pensions 
 
I have had more letters about the problems for pensioners than almost any other topic recently. 
Firstly the ordinary old age pension does not keep up with the cost of living or wage rises and taxes 
and fuel costs increase at a greater rate than pensioners can cope with. I have registered my 
support for the Pensioners' Manifesto which asserts that the basic pension must be increased and 
rise every year in line with average earnings or prices; that all long-term care should be free and 
that legislation should be introduced to prevent age discrimination. 
Secondly pensions from firms that have gone into receivership or that can no longer meet their 
commitments have put a large number of local people into great difficulties. The Government have 
addressed the problem, probably inadequately, of firms that may fail in the future but so far have 
given no help to historical cases. Then there are many people who have been hit by failure of life 
assurance companies. At least the Government appear to have relented over the proposed changes 
to pension age for public service workers. Pensions will be a major concern for the next 
Government.  
 
Tax  
 
I agree that taxes should be increased for the well-off to fund the improvements to public services 
that we all desire. Here I favour the proposals for local income tax to replace council tax as a fairer 
method of taking into account ability to pay and proposals for a higher rate of tax on those earning 
over Ј100,000 per year.  
 
ID Cards 
 
Talking to people I find varied views on these. Some are vehemently opposed. Others can see a 
benefit if it means that the ID card becomes the only document that is needed for identification as 
our wallets are already bursting with plastic, card and paper and if any of this could be eliminated it 
would be helpful. If re-elected I shall take further soundings before a decision is put to the House of 
Commons. 
 
Europe 
 
From talking to local people I am aware that closer trade ties with Europe would be welcomed but 
most are horrified at the idea of coming under a European Constitution and laws and with the 
prospect of losing our currency or our independence as a state of a federal Europe. 
 
Iraq 
 
I voted with the Liberal Democrats and Labour and Tory rebels against the Iraq war as I believed 
there were other ways of achieving the same ends albeit at a slower pace. The reasonably 
successful elections in Iraq do not justify the action which the Goverment took, and now we have to 
work out a strategy that will allow foreign troops to leave Iraq as soon as possible and yet allow a 
continuation of democracy and not a takeover by warring factions. This will be extremely difficult as 
we are seen by the indigenous people as invaders rather than friends. I do not pretend to have the 
answer but strenuous efforts must be made in this direction.  
 
Terrorism 
 
I voted against the Government's draconian proposals for confinement of suspected terrorists 
without trial, defence or even knowledge of the evidence against the accused as I feel the police 
already have enough powers for short term detention. This country must remain true to the ideals of 
liberty and freedom of speech to which we have been accustomed. Inevitably there are risks of 
terrorist attack but I feel that increased vigilance by all of us including reporting any suspicions we 
may have about neighbours and casual observations will add extra safety to our communities. 
 
Immigration and Asylum 
 
I was horrified when the Government in a previous Bill attempted to remove the right of appeal 
from asylum seekers after rejection of their case for residence here. 
I would strive to achieve shortening of the period of uncertainty for all asylum seekers and to make 
it possible for workers with useful and needed skills to be fast tracked so that they could become 
earning members of our society rapidly rather than drawing unnecessary financial support for long 
periods. However competition for jobs must be seen to be fair for local applicants also. 
 
It is essential to study areas where ethnic groups have integrated well into local communities and 
the large number of individuals for whom race is no longer an issue as they are fully accepted for 
their own worth. Lessons must be learnt to reduce the strife and unhappiness where it occurs. As 
ours is a small island, quotas for immigration will have to be decided preferably by an independent 
body without political interference.  
 
Aid for Developing Countries 
 
It is vital that we continue to press the Government on the need to cancel third world debt and offer 
financial assistance, particularly to African countries with the HIV/AIDS epidemic. With education 
this can be lessened and with treatment the disease can be controlled as is shown by the long term 
survival of people in western countries. I have supported and will continue to support Parliamentary 
Early Day Motions and other measures addressing these issues that could be helped by the UK 
especially this year with our position on influential international bodies. 
 
This is your opportunity to re-elect me to continue to be your totally independent MP, 
unfettered by major political party allegiance.  
 
Please use your vote to support me to keep Wyre Forest firmly independent. 
 
Dr. Richard Taylor
 
 

 

 
Promoted and printed by Malcolm Cooper on behalf of Dr Richard Taylor 
of Independent Kidderminster Hospital and Health Concern, 
137, Franche Road, Kidderminster. DY11 5AP
(c) Independent Kidderminster Hospital & Health Concern 2005 
(webdesign@chaddesley-corbett.co.uk) 
  
Disclaimer: See Conditions on Homepage <Index>
 
