LOCALISM, not GLOBALISM 
Localism means discriminating in favour of, and orientating the economic system 
towards, local and national needs and markets. This helps to ensure that governments and 
peoples maintain control over their own economy, for their own benefit.
Our principle of Localism is the key to deliver our Green Programme.
The opposite of Localism is "Globalism", also referred to as "Globalisation". Globalism 
is the de-regulation of all trading conditions, which results in taking power away from 
governments and peoples, and thereby destroying the ability of individuals, communities 
and nation-states to determine their own existence, while wrecking the world's ecology.
We stand in opposition to globalising organisations, including the WTO, the World Bank, 
the IMF, the EU, and corporate treaties such as the MAI, which replace nation-states and 
democracy with the domination of unrestrained corporate finance.
We stand in opposition to those who claim that the population should be adjusted in order 
to serve the economy. We say to them that the economy will adjust to the population. The 
fundamental principle at stake is that our economy is here to serve us. We are not here to 
serve the economy!
EUROPE: a SANE Relationship 
Independent Green Voice wants Britain to leave the EU.
It is impossible to consider Britain and Scotland's government, without also considering 
European Union government. That is because membership of the EU is the one issue 
which governs all the issues.
Legally, around 70% of Britain's laws are now made by the EU. All the issues in this 
Manifesto are bound into EU membership -- whether it is environmental issues, 
agriculture, fishing, immigration and asylum -- Westminster can only make laws within 
the boundaries determined by Brussels.
Financially, the UK pays a staggering £36million a day to Brussels, as part of our EU 
membership (United Kingdom Balance of Payments: The Pink Book 2004, Table 9.2). 
That is an average of £55,700 per parliamentary constituency, per day. This is a massive 
amount of money, which should be paying for our pensioners, young families, students, 
public services, hospitals and schools right here in Glasgow South West, every day.
We say: Let's get out the EU, spend our money at home, and by our own good example, 
show the way to a new Europe built upon co-operation, democracy, national diversity and 
self-determination for all.
We want to replace the present European Union with a Sovereign Association for the 
Nations of Europe. This means a SANE relationship where we agree to associate with 
our European friends in areas of mutual benefit, rather than a political Superstate where 
we must do what we're told, regardless of how much it hurts us. We have developed this 
SANE concept here
The best way to achieve a SANE relationship is for Britain to leave the EU and show a 
new way by our own good example. 
If we left the EU, we could easily save enough money to fund, for example, a new set of 
support mechanisms for our agriculture, or to fight the war on poverty. 
In the meantime, we will use our Independent Green Voice in the Westminster 
Parliament to encourage a spirit of defiance to European Union laws which act against 
the best interests of the British people, and to oppose the so-called "EU Constitution". 
MONEY REFORM 
Establish a Public Investment Bank 
Economic Democracy is the democratisation of economic power. This requires 
decentralising economic power, and economically empowering smaller units -- whether it 
is the individual, or the community, or the people collectively -- through democratic 
mechanisms.
The present method of money creation, whereby virtually all money comes into society 
as an interest bearing debt owed to the private banking system is contrary to the 
democratic imperative that the creation of money should be a public service, under 
public control for the public good.
The present method of money creation gives great power to those private individuals and 
organisations who create the money.
Economic Democracy would empower the people with the means of creating and 
controlling their own money supply. It would democratise the creation and control of 
money. 
As a step towards Economic Democracy, we advocate that Westminster establishes a 
democratic, accountable and not-for-profit Public Investment Bank -- a People's Bank -- 
which will create debt-free money, up to a certain annual amount, which will fund 
specific public projects which have been agreed by the Parliament. 
A Public Investment Bank run on this basis would be able to create adequate funds with 
no need for tax rises. It would ensure an injection of public funds which could be made 
available, stimulating our economy, improving the quality of life for all citizens, while at 
the same time, ensuring no additional burden to the taxpayer.
A FUTURE FOR FISHING 
Our fishing communities have been discarded overboard by the politicians and 
bureaucrats, who have usurped the people's decision-making power, and consequently 
betrayed them. 
The first step to re-empowering these local communities is to remove the power from the 
supra-national politicians, and put it back in the hands of the people.
Practically speaking, that means, firstly, freeing ourselves from the Common Fisheries 
Policy, to ensure the local community has the freedom to fish as it chooses -- with 
security, provided if necessary, at the national level by HM Armed Forces. 
In order to achieve the policy objectives of rebuilding fishing communities and 
ensuring proper environmental management of fish stocks, we must re-establish 
control of Britain's 200-mile exclusive fishing zone. If each country caught fish in areas 
that were exclusive to itself, there would be an incentive to conserve and nurture fish 
stocks. We would restore respect for the ocean's providence and we would rebuild fishing 
communities.
We advocate withdrawing from the CFP.
Once a community has a secure freedom to fish, it will then have the power in its own 
hands to determine its own existence -- which will require tempering its freedom, with 
its technical, economic and ecological wisdom.
This secure freedom may also lead to fishing communities being able to co-operate 
internationally with other similarly secure fishing communities Europe-wide, in order 
to reach where possible, mutually respectful arrangements which benefit each other's 
economies and ecologies.
HEALTHY SCHOOL MEALS AND LOCALISM 
According to the Soil Association, 75% of primary schools in England spend less than 
50p on food for a school meal.
Jamie Oliver's recent TV campaign has highlighted the 37p allocation for ingredients, 
spent in some areas of the country. This compares to an average of 60-70p spent in 
France, Spain, Italy, Finland and Japan.
This under-investment leads to a bias towards processed foods overly high in salt, sugar 
fat, artificial additives and cheap, imported produce.
This downward spiral began during the 1980s and early '90s when compulsory 
competitive tendering was introduced under the 1988 Local Government Act. Local 
authorities were obliged to put school-meal contracts out to tender without any minimum 
nutritional standards. In the process, kitchens were ripped out of some schools, and in 
others, the job of dinner ladies was reduced to warming-up the processed foods which 
were delivered by the caterers.
A COOKERY CULTURE CHANGE 
Changing this requires a complete cookery culture change. It requires moving from 
processed foods towards school meals with ingredients sourced locally wherever possible 
-- including meats, organic produce, fresh juices, fruit and vegetables -- produced to the 
high standards we have come to expect from British farmers.
It will require in-house catering teams who have the budget to source locally and the 
skills to cook the products properly -- in short, a whole change in cookery culture and 
expectations.
Not only will this improve the diet and health of our children, but it will boost the local 
economy and support farmers and growers.
URBAN FARMING FOR SCHOOLS 
In the short term, rural schools can be better positioned to take these ideas forward. 
For example, Landscove primary school near Ashburton, Devon has signed a contract 
with Riverford organic vegetable farm to provide food, including locally sourced free-
range meat, and to cook it in its custom-made kitchen. 
Robin Smith, the headmaster says, "We will be planting up little parts of fields and 
children will be going back to harvest some of those vegetables. They will take them to 
the kitchen and the cook will help them to prepare the vegetables for that day's school 
dinner." (Richard Savill, "Green-fingered pupils to grow own vegetables", The Daily 
Telegraph, 22-3-05, p.4) 
However, there is no reason why urban schools cannot develop creative action here too, 
given the appropriate help, and some are doing so already. 
There is no reason why all schools throughout the country can't be sourcing from local 
market gardens, and farms, or even setting up their own allotments in the city, where the 
children can learn to grow and cook their own food.
POLICY SUGGESTIONS:  
While acknowledging that parents, not the state, are responsible for bringing up children, 
a fully-funded programme to integrate healthy eating and national food sovereignty 
would look something like this:
*	Adopt statutory nutritional standards, such as those provided by the Caroline 
Walker Trust, which have been adopted by the Scottish executive. Meeting these 
standards requires cooking fresh foods again. 
*	Encourage schools to cater for themselves. Many schools source their food 
directly from large catering companies, which have to make a profit. Cost 
breakdown is approximately that one third of the price of the school dinner goes 
on the ingredients, one third on the wages of the kitchen staff and one third to the 
catering company. If schools cut out the caterer, it can allow them to invest 
directly in the kitchen, source locally, and improve the salaries of cooking staff. In 
some cases this will require schools to re-install kitchens which were stripped out 
years ago and for cooking staff to be reskilled. 
*	Encourage schools to source fresh and local food as a priority, and look 
further afield only when the food product is not available locally. 
*	School milk sourced from British farmers, and where and when possible, 
locally-grown fruit for all primary schools and Britain's 37,000 nurseries, both 
state and private. Only around 10% of 5-11 year olds have school milk on offer, 
and most of that is only once a week. This is 1-2% of the UK liquid milk market. 
It could be at least 20%! 
*	Schools to remove all junk-food and drink vending machines. Children high 
on E-numbers, additives and too much sugar, can't concentrate! 
*	Encourage schools to develop own allotments where they can grow their own 
vegetables providing both an educational and physical experience, as well as 
healthy food. Nearby farms to be helped to provide fields for this purpose -- a 
facility which can also be integrated into... 
*	Statutory farm visits for all schoolchildren so they learn where food comes 
from and develop an awareness of agriculture and its importance, which is 
integrated with... 
*	Healthy eating, cooking and home economics on the school curriculum. As 
Joe Harvey, director of the Health Education Trust says, "The dining room is a 
classroom", a crucial part of the day's learning and civilising opportunities. 
*	Encourage school sports. Children today are leading increasingly sedentary 
lives, contributing to their ill health and obesity. 
*	And last but not least...roll out the locally-sourced programme to hospitals 
and all public institutions including care homes. However, the bad news is that 
of the 72 PFI hospitals open or under construction, almost all have been built 
without kitchens! 
To object that such a programme would be "expensive", is false economics, because the 
money would go back into the local economy. The programme would pay for itself 
through a more dynamic local economy, a revived farming and market gardening sector 
nationally, and a healthier population.
OPPOSING CORPORATE CONTROL 
of the Food Supply 
According to Defra's annual Agriculture in the UK 2004 report published at the end of 
January on the internet, Britain's self-sufficiency in indigenous food -- that which can be 
produced in the UK -- has fallen by 12% over the last ten years.
It is down from 86.2% in 1994 to an appalling 74.2% in 2004.
Britain is developing a growing and unhealthy reliance on cheaper, lower standard 
imports. 
It is an unhealthy development because we are becoming dependent upon vulnerable 
outside sources, we are losing jobs and custodians of the countryside, and the 
environment is suffering from unnecessary long-distance trade.
Reference: The report can be downloaded at 
http://statistics.defra.gov.uk/esg/publications/auk/2004/excel.asp The figures for Self 
Sufficiency are at Table 4.1 http://statistics.defra.gov.uk/esg/publications/auk/2004/4-
1.xls
LEGISLATE TO LIMIT THE MARKET SHARE OF SUPERMARKETS 
So, what is to be done? Some extensive ideas are here.
Additionally, in the Farmer's Guardian of 3 December 2004, Richard Boden, of the 
Wye Farmers Market in Kent and its Recycling Group, Wyecycle, suggests this 
interesting policy:
Farmers Guardian (FG, Nov 26) is full of pleas from farming organisations for 
supermarkets to pay a fair price. For the NFU, Soil Association and Farm to be reduced 
to begging for 'more please' at the high table of Tesco, is not only demeaning for a proud 
industry but completely futile. 
It is a waste of their time and their members' subscription fees to lobby the supermarkets, 
which will only continue to make sympathetic noises while laughing all the way to the 
bank. 
Instead, all energies should be put into campaigning on the one issue at the heart of the 
problem; market share. 
Alliances should be formed with environmental organisations concerned about food 
miles, trade bodies campaigning on the decline of the independent retailer, and all the 
other special interest groups whose cause would be furthered by seeing a reversal in the 
concentration of market share in food retailing. 
Working with these allies, farming organisations could deliver a loud and clear message 
to Government that legislation on market share would benefit farmers, the environment 
and the public and harm no-one but a handful of obscenely rich people. 
To quote George Monbiot: "Every year the list is the same, but every year it still comes 
as a shock. Of the 10 richest people on earth, five have the same surname. It's not Gates, 
or Murdoch, or Rockefeller, but Walton. They are the heirs and trustees of the 
supermarket chain Wal-Mart. Between them they are worth $l00bn." 
Farmers can either continue to watch their industry be decimated while kidding 
themselves that they can negotiate with such people, or they can get real and start 
demanding legislation to reverse the concentration of market share in food retailing.
MARKET SHARE IS THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL 
He expands on this in a Wyecycle Press Release under the above title, which reads: 
Every politician would claim to be at least slightly concerned about the following issues:
*	Global warming 
*	Traffic congestion 
*	Illness and injury caused by road traffic 
*	The balance of payments deficit 
*	Loss of bio-diversity in the countryside 
*	Britain's "waste crisis" 
*	Poor diet and its effects 
*	Pollution and ill health caused by chemical dependant agriculture 
*	The well-being of developing countries 
*	Our absolute dependence on oil
*	Falling employment in agriculture and allied industries
*	Animal welfare
*	Loss of community; "clone town Britain"
*	The cost to the taxpayer of propping up agriculture and the rural economy 
When people -- farmers, small businesses, politicians -- moan about "the supermarkets", 
the fundamental concern is about market share and the power it brings.
What is and what isn't a "supermarket" must therefore be defined according to how much 
market share a business has. WyeCycle would define a supermarket as being any 
business responsible for more than 1% of UK food retailing.
It is possible, using this definition, to debunk the myth that, "The public like shopping at 
supermarkets". 
The public do like to do all of their weekly shopping under one roof, with a wide range of 
produce, ideally with an adjacent car park. 
They do not demand that such a place is owned by a company responsible for more 
than 1% of UK food retailing.
Once this difference is understood between what the public considers to be a supermarket 
and what a supermarket actually is, it becomes possible to see the solution to the issues 
outlined above. 
By introducing legislation stating that no one company may be responsible for more 
than 1% of UK food retailing, all of these issues would be simultaneously addressed. 
Such legislation would not require the public to change their habits in any way, making it 
a vote winner for all the benefits it would bring rather than a vote loser.
All that is required is the political will to show that it is our elected representatives, 
rather than big business, who run the country.
ANIMAL WELFARE 
We are Animal Welfare advocates.
We make a distinction between Animal Welfare and Animal Rights.
"Animal Rights" is a theory, and lifestyle, which claims that animals have the same 
"rights" as humans, and therefore should not be "exploited". This leads to the comparison 
that livestock farming -- of any kind -- is equivalent to human slavery and genocide. 
Consequently, all Animal Rightists are vegans (not just vegetarians). 
Animal Welfare, however, is a different concept. 
We want: 
*	An end to Live Exports which are widely known to be cruel. We argue for new 
markets based on Localisation and Food Sovereignty, and for financial 
compensation and subsidies to enable farming to move this way. 
*	An end to "Factory Farming". The main areas for advocacy in Britain today are 
the ending of battery cages -- including the so-called "enriched cages" scheduled 
to replace smaller cages -- intensive meat production of chickens, turkeys and 
ducks, and intensive pig farming. We want research and development and 
subsidies to be directed to help agriculture move towards more natural and 
organic methods of production. 
*	Rigid application of quality control to keep out food imports which do not 
conform to our animal welfare standards. These cheap imports are directly 
responsible for putting our British farmers out of business, as well as being 
morally indefensible by our own standards. 
*	Oppose SI 255 which offends both the principles of animal welfare and civil 
liberties. 
*	An end to Vivisection. There is no animal testing for cosmetics allowed in 
Britain. However, we advocate a ban on imported cosmetics which have been 
animal-tested. While we recognise that, in some cases, there may still be a need to 
use animal testing in medical or military (self-defence) research, we aim to phase 
this out and encourage alternative research methods. 
ENERGY INDEPENDENCE 
AN ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLE of SOVEREIGNTY
Independent Green Voice advocates Energy Independence. A sovereign individual, 
community or nation is able to provide for its own energy needs.
It should be the goal of a nation aspiring to sovereignty to achieve Energy Independence. 
A nation which is unable to achieve Energy Independence may become perilously reliant 
upon outside sources, or may even need to develop imperialistic policies which threaten 
other nations. 
Consequently, we advocate a Sustainable Energy for National Self-Reliance 
Programme. 
However, the present government's drive for "renewable energy", is driven by its strategy 
to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from conventional power stations, in order to meet its 
commitments on "global warming". National Self-Reliance -- as a motivating engine -- 
does not factor. Indeed, an imbalance towards "renewables" could lead to national 
dependence upon outside forces. 
Moreover, the "global warming" theory is a contentious proposition. By no means are all 
scientists and academics agreed that such a thing even exists! See for example Professor 
David Bellamy's article, Global Warming? What a Load of Poppycock in the Daily Mail 
of 9th July 2004, and reproduced here.
Indeed, the toxic element of fossil fuels is of more direct concern to our health and our 
environment, than the highly debatable "global warming" theory.
We advocate that Energy Policy should be based on the rationale of National Self-
Reliance -- rather than "reducing global warming". 
If we had an energy policy based on National Self-Reliance, then "renewables" could 
indeed play an important and useful part, if applied appropriately where they are most 
efficient -- on small-scale, not industrial, levels. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR A NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 
Rather than basing national energy policy on reducing emissions of carbon dioxide 
supposedly to reduce "global warming", it makes more sense to base energy policy on the 
following principles: 
?	Self-Reliance - at a National, Local and Personal Level. Guided by this first and 
most essential principle, energy mechanisms would be chosen for their ability to 
provide the necessary power, efficiently, at the appropriate level. This could lead 
to a wide range of energy alternatives, including effective forms of renewable 
energy utilised where they can most efficiently be applied. 
?	Freedom from Pollution and Environmental Destruction. Guided by this 
secondary principle we would aim to reduce levels of toxicity in our atmosphere -
- such as those produced by fossil fuels -- without compromising the first essential 
energy principle of Self Reliance -- and we would reject particular energy 
proposals which caused environmental damage. 
?	Renewables are often best Applied on the Small-Scale. The concept of renewable 
energy flows from the heart of ecological awareness. At the heart of ecological 
awareness is the understanding that small is beautiful, that our footprints on the 
planet should be light, that we seek to live in harmony with nature. Thus 
renewable energy mechanisms must be applied within that understanding. 
Clearly, industrial wind farms contradict the very essence of ecological 
awareness. Instead, wind power is best utilised on the small-scale, to provide an 
element of self-reliance and less pollution at the level of a home, a hotel, a farm, a 
community, an institution, or a public sector building. Such a principle in action 
would help people to "live off the grid". It would encourage them to utilise wind 
and solar energy for their own power generation, which could be sold to the 
National Grid when it generated more than they needed. 
SOME SENSIBLE GREEN ENERGY POLICIES 
Here are some do-able Green Energy Policies for saving and for generating energy, and 
for combating toxic pollution, which make more sense than blighting the landscape 
with industrial wind farms. 
*	Re-orientate Wind Power from Industrial to Mini-turbine applied where it's most 
efficient -- at the personal, communal and specific project level, with 
consideration and provision given for neighbours potentially affected by flicker or 
noise to object to planning permission. 
*	Make new-build Houses "Energy Efficient". Whether the government is capable 
of such "joined-up thinking", however, remains debatable. For example, the new 
Scottish Parliament has been built so "energy inefficiently" that when the MSPs 
moved in at the end of August, Alex Fergusson MSP pointed out,"The offices are 
also going to be without natural light for much of the year -- and when you have 
got a window that cost £17,000, that's a bit of a shame." Roseanna Cunningham 
MSP said,"I'm really disappointed at how dark it is. Clearly the lights are going to 
have to be on all the time, even in the summer."  (Scottish Daily 
Mail,31 August 2004) 
*	Aim Long-term for Solar Content in all new-build Housing. At the moment, 
fitting new-build housing with solar panels is not practical given the expense, 
which is affordable only by the better-off. However, new public sector buildings 
could be fitted with solar panels. This would provide an on-going scientific 
project which would lead, in time, to the development of cheaper methods of 
solar-harnessing technology. 
*	Increase Natural Woodland -- not necessarily forestry. 
*	Increase Cropping Bio-diversity in farming and Green Spaces in towns and cities. 
*	Develop and Promote Biofuels as an alternative to fossil fuels, including 
especially those made from household waste. All new vehicles in Brazil, for 
example, run on ethanol, either pure or mixed with petrol, produced from its sugar 
cane crop. 
ENERGY POLICY DOES NOT EXIST IN A VACUUM 
There are bigger issues related around our consumption of energy which the government 
must address -- otherwise all the wind farms from John o' Groats to Penzance will never 
keep up with demand! 
o	Implement Zero Net Immigration. Ultimately, energy needs are dependent upon 
quantity of people. The more people, the more energy needed. And the fewer 
people, the less pollution! So, we must stop unsustainable mass immigration and 
bogus "asylum seeking", which means, at the very least, implementing zero net 
immigration. 
o	Re-orientate Trade to the Local.... Economic Globalisation uses more energy than 
a localised economic system. A policy of National Food Sovereignty would help 
cut back on unnecessary long-distance trade. 
o	Build Social Cohesion. If people are using cars more often, is it because they are 
scared to walk the streets or use public transport? In which case, energy use is 
related to Social Breakdown, and inter-related with Law and Order issues. 
o	Consider the Careful Application of Environmental Taxes. This is a tricky field 
because we must ensure that prices are not simply passed on to the consumer, or 
burden the less well-off, or put important national industries out of business. Any 
such policy has to be balanced within the overall aim of assuring National Self-
Reliance. And generally it can be agreed that technology, not taxation, will cut 
pollution in the long-term. But in the short-term, consider: Do cut-price airfares to 
the Continent, for example, really reflect their true cost in terms of energy use, 
and environmental impact? 
REAL GREEN WINDPOWER aims for SELF-RELIANT ENERGY PROVISION 
on a SMALL-SCALE 
Wind is best harnessed at a small-scale, not an industrial-sized, level. 
For example, this excellent little "mini-turbine" is reputed to provide 15% of the annual 
electricity needs of an average house, and represents the direction in which the 
windpower movement needs to travel. That is, it needs to travel in the direction of 
providing Energy Independence for individuals, families, small-scale institutions, and 
public sector buildings.... It should not be travelling in the direction of vast industrial 
windfarms which blight the landscape, destroy the surrounding environment, are highly 
subsidised and expensive, and in terms of national dependence, dangerously inefficient.  
Compactly sized, the new device (which we would prefer to see shielded so as not to 
cause distractive flicker or hurt birds) would appear, even at this quite early stage in its 
development, to offer a practical application of the principles of Localisation.

RECYCLING 
A Pragmatic Zero Waste Strategy
The Zero Waste Principle states: Everything we buy is made from materials which can 
be re-used, re-paired or re-cycled, and in those cases where they cannot, the products 
should be re-designed to fit the system, while at the same time we should seek to reduce 
the amount we use!
However, we are not dogmatic about this. We don't get hung up on the "zero" bit. We 
recognise that if everything had to be recyclable, we can say goodbye to computers or 
most other technological equipment -- since they simply cannot be made that way. 
Possibly in some future time, but definitely not now or in the immediate future.
Furthermore, we do not believe in compulsion. People can be encouraged to re-cycle, 
but the guiding principles are: Recycling should be voluntary and practical. There 
should be no legal coercion or punishment involved. 
In that regard, Scotland lags behind other European nations. 90% of the 3m tonnes of 
household and commercial waste collected by Scottish councils in 2002 went into 
landfills. Only 7.4% was recycled, despite 60% (1.8 million tonnes) of all the waste 
being biodegradable. This was a slight improvement on the previous year, when only 6% 
was reused. But the figures were small compared to other countries like Switzerland 
which recycles 52% of its waste, the Netherlands 45% and the US 31%.
SOME PRAGMATIC POLICIES:
*	Promote SWERF Technology The plain fact is that under present technology 
some waste simply cannot be reverted to its original components. It may, 
however, be reprocessed and re-used for something else. Here is an example of 
one seriously viable means of refuse separation, recycling and disposal; in this 
instance at Derby -- SWERF: Solid Waste and Energy Recycling Facility has the 
ability to produce electricity from almost any kind of waste matter. 
*	Promote Biofuels from Waste Products The Thermal Depolymerisation Process 
(TDP) can turn animal waste, offal, old tyres, junked computers and any old waste 
into oil and gas. 
*	Roll out a Waste Recycling and Composting Initiative. Commercial food 
premises and hotels, especially, should be able to dispose of their waste in special 
composting bins. To that end, legislation which prohibits the use of such compost 
because of an unproven risk of "disease" should be challenged. 
MOVING FROM FORESTRY 
TO WOODLAND AND HILL FARMING
Alistair McConnachie, IGV candidate for Glasgow South West, right, planting a 3-
acre woodland in Galloway with his father in December 2004, writes: 
In this policy statement we are defining "forestry" as commercial conifer plantation and 
"woodland" as native hardwood plantation.
Between the 1930s and '80s hundreds of thousands of acres of what remained of Britain's 
ancient woodlands were felled and replanted, mostly with commercial conifers.
The Woodland Trust tells us that over the next 10 years, most of the conifers planted on 
ancient woodland sites will reach economic maturity. This represents an enormous 
opportunity for those of us who want to see a move to natural woodland and the increased 
bio-diversity it brings.
Moreover, much of our traditional hill farming areas have been, and continue to be, 
planted with conifers, with one seventh of commercial British forestation in Galloway 
alone.
In 1999 responsibility for forestry was devolved, with Westminster retaining 
responsibility for forestry in England and for international issues.
DAMAGING ASPECTS OF COMMERCIAL FORESTATION
Mass forestation with Sitka Spruce conifers has been a regressive act which has replaced 
agricultural diversity with mono-culture. Mass forestation leads to a loss of people, 
landscape, farm animals, wild animals, flora, fauna, the built-heritage, including 
settlements, farms, dykes, and the social-cultural heritage. The conifer canopy destroys 
all the wildlife and vegetation beneath it.
Land that cannot be planted is left as a wilderness area which can lead to the loss of 
species, the domination of predators and the loss of ground-nesting birds.
When rain falls on peaty soil, the vegetation will act as a filter. However, once the trees 
are felled there is nothing to absorb the rain, which gouges out the rivers. Salmon can't 
spawn because the gravel where they laid their eggs is gouged away by the torrent, and 
because the acidification levels of the water are too high.
Such forestry gives little employment to the area, jobs are often contracted out, and the 
machines often damage the roads. The Sitka Spruce plantations, many of which have 
been growing for 40 years, are often not profitable when cut down.
Sovereignty believes we need to move from commercial forestation of softwoods on our 
ancient woodland areas and hill grounds, to native hardwood woodlands and hill farming.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR WOODLAND AND HILL POLICY 
*	People are the most essential species interacting with the land. If we lose the 
core - the people -- then we can't survive with "diversification" alone. Agriculture 
is the basis of many rural areas, and without it a diverse countryside will not be 
possible. 
  
*	Local people to remain in control. 
  
*	Woodland is superior to forestry. 
  
*	Bio-diversity of flora and fauna to be encouraged. 
  
*	Hill farming to be supported and encouraged. Animals are environmental 
activists. On traditional hill farms, the sheep and cattle keep down the bracken 
and heather -- which means we don't need the indiscriminate application of 
"environmental" programmes, promoted by pharmaceutical companies, using 
pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides to control them. As sheep and cattle are 
removed, under-grazing depletes the herbage because the hill ground becomes 
overwhelmed with these weeds. Government is not recognising the relevance, 
reinstatement and continuation of traditional hill farms. At present, the only safety 
net for a farmer who wants to retire is to sell to forestry! 
WOODLAND POLICIES 
*	Forestry Commission to restore all its ancient woodland sites presently 
planted with conifers, with native hardwoods, thereby acting as an example to 
other landowners. 
  
*	Generous grants for hardwood development. Planting and managing a wood is 
something that rarely creates a return on investment within one's working 
lifetime. Therefore, woodland planting must be largely subsidised by government 
as a common good. 
  
*	Woodlands to replace felled Sitka Spruce forests in those areas where land 
cannot revert to agricultural use. 
  
*	Encourage woodcraft skills such as coppicing, charcoal burning, timber 
building, wood craftsmanship, and develop markets for such products. 
  
*	Increase greening of towns and cities with hardwoods. 
HILL FARMING POLICIES
*	Make Forestry Commission fully accountable and transparent. The Forestry 
Commission controls vast tracts of hill land yet there is concern that it is an 
unaccountable quango. 
  
*	Tenants of farms on Forestry Commission land to be allowed to pass the land 
to legatees or assignees. This is presently prohibited in the conditions of Forestry 
Commission tenancies in Scotland! A prohibition which prevents any ability to 
hill farm for the long-term. 
  
*	An end to mass conifer forestation on traditional hill farms. 
  
*	Conifer plantation limited to maximum of 10 acres. 
  
*	Hill land to be sold or rented only to individuals or families for the purposes 
of farming, not to corporations, pension funds or foreign buyers for large-scale 
forestation. 
  
*	Empower local communities legally to oppose forestation. 
  
The Forestry Commission can be contacted for information on grants for woodland planting, at 
www.forestry.gov.uk The National Office for Scotland is at Silvan House, 231 Corstorphine Road, 
Edinburgh, EH12 7AT, Tel: 0131 314 6156.
The Woodland Trust, Autumn Park, Dysart Road, Grantham, Lincolnshire, NG31 6LL; Tel: 01476 
581111. www.woodland-trust.org.uk
Recycling Wood. The UK produces 2m tons of post-consumer wood waste a year. 800,000 tonnes is 
recycled, leaving 1.2m tons of wood products rotting in landfills. A new wood-recycling information 
service has been launched to help identify collection and recycling services in your area. 
www.recyclewood.org.uk
SUPPORT OUR PENSIONERS 
There are 10,514,100 people in Britain who draw the state pension. They receive an 
average state pension of £85.55 per week. A further 988,700 draw the state pension 
abroad.
The following table indicates the number of people claiming pension per region, and the 
average weekly payment. Figures are from the Department of Work and Pensions for 
Sept 2004.
Great Britain
10,514,100
£85.55
Abroad
988,700
£36.97
Wales
582,600
£83.54
South West
1,066,300
£83.80
Yorkshire and The 
Humber
922,600
£84.57
Northern
586,600
£84.75
East Midlands
786,300
£85.47
North West
1,145,600
£85.77
West Midlands
985,800
£85.62
Scotland
935,300
£85.99
London
956,300
£86.16
East Anglia
454,600
£85.48
South East
2,092,100
£87.08
The link between pensions and earnings was removed in 1980. Pensioners groups have 
long campaigned to restore the link and to raise the pension to the level it would be at, if 
the link had not been broken. 
For example, the following is the recommendations of the National Pensioners 
Convention:
THE 10-POINT PLAN OF 
THE NATIONAL PENSIONER'S CONVENTION 
1. An immediate increase in the basic state pension to the level of the Pensions Credit. 
2. The restoration of the link between the basic state pension and average earnings.  
3. The maintenance and strengthening of the national insurance fund as the basis for 
providing financial security in retirement. 
4. A £22 weekly age addition for the over 75s. 
5. All nursing and personal care to be provided free at the point of delivery, whether in 
hospital, nursing homes or one's own home. 
6. Comprehensive health care, provided free at the point of need, including community 
care. 
7. Free TV licences, free travel on public transport and a £200 winter fuel allowance for 
all pensioners. 
8. The removal of standing charges on gas, electricity, water and telephone. 
9. Legislation to end age discrimination in all areas of society.  
10. Pensioners and their representatives to be involved in every level of policy-making 
and development that affects the lives of older people. 
"INDEPENDENCE DIVIDEND" FOR PENSIONERS 
Euro-realists have long pointed out the extent to which pensions could be supported from 
the annual payments which presently go to the European Union. At a gross payment of 
£36m a day to Brussels and with 10.5m pensioners at home, this works out at £3.43 per 
day per pensioner, or £24 per week. 
However, it is unrealistic to imagine, or to suggest, that the entire "Independence 
Dividend" would be spent on increasing the state pension! Nevertheless, the point is clear 
that if we left the EU, there would be more money in the bag, which could be spent on 
pensions and care for the elderly.
ADDITIONAL POLICIES
?	Abolish means-testing, which punishes those who save for their retirement.
?	No extension of the minimum public service retirement age, whether to 65 or 
beyond.
?	Just as there should be no extension of the retirement age, so there should be no 
compulsory retirement for those who want to continue to work. As has been 
demonstrated here, any economic challenges faced by demographic change can be 
offset by advantaging those older British citizens who want to return to paid 
employment. If by 2021 we have been able to encourage between one-in-ten and 
one-in-seven otherwise unpaid 50-69 year olds in the UK to take paid 
employment, then we can more than pay for the costs of demographic change. It's 
not necessary to import people from all over the world!
?	Roll out energy-efficiency programmes to ensure local councils have a statutory 
duty to ensure high insulation standards in all homes.
?	Assistance for those who choose to look after their elderly relatives at home. 
?	Encourage a study into the feasibility of a Citizen's Income which would be 
given to all British citizens as of right, which would replace many of the existing 
benefits, and potentially simplify the welfare system. 
FUND PENSIONS THROUGH LOCAL INVESTMENT 
Furthermore, consideration should be given to the concept of a "People's Pension Fund" 
which links pensions with local investment in public services and is not subject to the ups 
and downs of the stock market.
This could be a way out of the pensions crisis plaguing the UK. Devised by Richard 
Murphy, Colin Hines and Labour MP Alan Simpson, it proposes a new framework for 
pensions, based on investment in public infrastructure projects and services, which is 
currently not an option for UK pension funds.
As Richard Murphy says, "We have a pension crisis because we've been investing 
pension cash in the wrong things. The stock market has absorbed most UK pension 
investment, but less than 15 per cent of that money has actually been used to create 
new investment in the UK economy. The rest has been used for speculation. The 
government now has a duty to make sure that a more reliable basis for paying pensions is 
created -- we can't gamble our future security again. People's Pensions can create that 
security. It will also mean that the current annual £16.5 billion of state subsidy for 
pensions, most of which is now gambled, is better used."
Colin Hines says, "What we are providing here is a new choice for those who want to 
save for their retirement. No-one would have to buy a People's Pension. But if you did 
you'd have the benefit of knowing you'd provided for your old age and helped your local 
economy, all at the same time. A People's Pension Fund that could be invested in health, 
transport, education, sustainable energy and social housing projects -- depending on the 
investor's choice -- would provide the double benefit of boosting the cash available for 
public services projects, at a much lower cost than PPP or PFI options, and restocking the 
value of UK pension plans so that they provide a secure and dignified retirement." 
You can get a copy of the report by contacting, the New Economics Foundation, 
3 Jonathan Street, London, SE11 5NH, Tel: 020 7820 6300 or you can download it free 
from 
http://www.neweconomics.org/gen/z_sys_PublicationDetail.aspx?PID=131
POLICIES TO FIGHT POVERTY 
Officially, the level at which one is considered to be living "in poverty" is 60% of the 
median income -- even though many people living at this level do not consider 
themselves to be "in poverty". After all, one can have little money but be living in 
relatively stable circumstances.
For some elements in politics, the cause of poverty is obvious: "The poor are poor 
because the rich are rich" and the answer is "soak the rich!" 
But it's not that simple.
This is a mistaken way of understanding the complex issue of poverty, based on a false 
understanding of the nature of both money and people. 
They believe, wrongly, that money is finite. They imagine there is only so much of it to 
go around and "the rich" have confiscated most of it for themselves. 
However, in reality, money is infinite and banks create it out of nothing every time you 
take a loan!
Furthermore, it is a "reductionist" view, in the sense that it reduces poverty to one cause 
alone -- a matter of finance. 
Of course, money is at the centre of all things, but a programme to tackle poverty needs 
to see it within a framework encompassing all the major issues in society, including in 
some instances, matters of personal responsibility for one's plight.
STRENGTHENING THE SOCIAL FABRIC  
Solutions are bound in with stable families, good education, pleasant environments, 
including the intrinsic ability of the inhabitants to maintain these good 
environments, and a law and order system in which everyone has confidence, and 
where those whose behaviour drags society down are dealt with appropriately. 
When this social fabric is strong then the chances of people and communities falling into 
poverty are reduced. 
Therefore, attacking poverty isn't just about ensuring welfare policies which help the 
poor, but about attacking the viruses which damage the social fabric in the first 
place: the tax policies which break up families or prevent families being formed, the 
education methods which don't work, the laws which allow drug dealers and criminals to 
walk free, and the architecture which isolates people and encourages criminality and 
environmental decline. 
Here are some policies which address specifically financial aspects of poverty:
POLICIES TO HELP LOW-INCOME COMMUNITIES
*	Increase Tax on Banking and Speculation Profits with the money ring-fenced 
for public projects in specific areas of poverty. 
*	Develop Concept of Citizens Income 
Encourage a study into the feasibility of a Citizen's Income as a right to all, which 
would replace many of the existing benefits and potentially simplify the system. 
This would be for British citizens only. Proponents say it would offer true 
freedom of choice via a lifetime's entitlement, which would not be means-tested 
and which would be the same for every citizen. 
*	A Local Income Tax to replace Council Tax, with people on incomes of less 
than £15,000 a year exempt. 
*	Investigate the Abolition of Credit Advertising.  
We have to be careful about "banning" things we don't like for two reasons. One, 
it encourages a lack of personal responsibility. After all, one doesn't need to act 
on the credit advert, just because one has seen it, anymore than one has to smoke 
or drink as a result of advertising. However, we also acknowledge that there are 
vulnerable people who do not have the ability to be "personally responsible" and, 
to an extent, require to be protected from exploitation. The second point to note is 
that when you ban something, it can reappear in another form, which can be just 
as harmful. 
*	Mandatory Clarification of Loan Terms 
What we really need is clear, enforced clarification of what the loans mean. The 
aim should be to give people all the information they need in order to allow them 
to take proper responsibility for their own lives. Indeed the "free market" requires 
the consumer to be informed! At the moment, people are being deceived. For 
example, instead of "6% per month", it should be clearly stated what this amounts 
to each year. We need to show the annual interest rate with a proper explanation, 
in all credit advertising and credit statements, in large bold text. 
*	A Legal Cap on Interest Rates  
The poorest households are increasingly turning to doorstep lenders charging high 
levels of interest. The campaign group Debt on our Doorstep has said that rates 
can be as high as 177% and that almost anyone is able to set up as a lender 
provided they have an easily obtainable consumer credit licence. Amazingly, the 
UK is virtually alone amongst developed economies in not having any form of 
legal cap on extortionate interest rates. We need tough new laws against 
extortionate and irresponsible credit lending. An interest rate cap would be 
gradually introduced to prevent complete market disruption and would be based 
on interest, loan duration and repayment method, to allow for different product 
options. See the report Profiting from Poverty: Why debt is big business in 
Britain. 
*	Support Credit Unions 
These can help prevent people drifting into the hands of illegal money lenders and 
getting trapped by mountains of debt. We need a £250m boost to promote low-
interest credit unions and other community finance initiativesin order to 
provide affordable alternative sources of credit. There is a concern that the £3 
billion Home Credit market is dominated by 4 companies who between them 
control 79% of the market. Yet, if the government helped credit unions become 
more actively involved in this market place then the companies who presently 
dominate would be forced to reform their practices and cut their charges. 
*	Curb Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) Charges 
We need the promotion of socially responsible service provision by the banks. 
Charging people to take out their own money is immoral, but the trend towards 
fee-charging ATMs increases as local banks close. The poorest communities are 
often the hardest hit by such bank and amenity closures, at the same time as they 
are encouraged by the government to have their benefits paid into bank accounts. 
HEALTH FOR ALL 
*	Address the Under-Staffing of the NHS by supporting a 15% pay rise for 
nurses, but especially by putting more emphasis on hands-on training for 
nurses, rather than college-based training. 
The recent emphasis on college-based training is putting off many people who 
would be good nurses, but who either don't have the qualifications, or who feel 
intimidated by the college-based emphasis. This includes especially older women, 
who have the life-experience and communication skills to make good nurses but 
who don't want, or who can't commit, to the college-based curriculum. 
A college-based qualification does not necessarily ensure that the nurse will have 
the communication skills, or hands-on ability to do the job. It takes a certain kind 
of person to be a good nurse and it doesn't mean being able to write an essay, or 
complete an "audit". 
*	More Family Friendly Policies for Nurses with young children. 
*	Slash Unnecessary Bureaucracy, and Encourage a New Look at Proven 
Strategies in Ward Management to ensure optimum patient care. For example, 
the older forms of ward management, while more institutional, had the advantage 
of sharing the workload more evenly between the nurses, enabling them to work 
as a team to ensure all the basic tasks were getting done. New forms of 
management can lead to individual nurses becoming overloaded, while looking 
after several "clients" at once. This can lead to a sense of isolation among nurses 
and lower morale. 
*	Prioritise Spending on Basic Medical and Surgical Resources. Nurses report 
that too often, basics such as pillows and blankets are becoming a scarce resource 
in our hospitals. 
*	Support a Programme of new-build, Council-run, high-quality Residential 
Nursing Homes which will help to relieve the burden of elderly patient care from 
the NHS. 
*	Support families who look after their own Elderly. If families are looking after 
elderly relatives at home then they should be supported financially by the state 
because they are taking the burden off the NHS. We support extra benefits to 
enable care of the elderly at home. 
*	Increase Awareness, and Emphasise Early Diagnosis, of Medical Problems 
by boosting screening programmes and educational measures which reach out 
directly to local communities. 
*	Protect Natural and Herbal Remedies, and Food Supplements, presently 
under threat from EU legislation, and encourage Complimentary Therapies. 
*	Free Eye and Dental Check-Ups. 
*	Free Prescriptions for All. 
*	Oppose Fluoridation. There remains a threat that the Scottish Executive may try 
to introduce fluoridation of the Scottish water supply after the next Scottish 
Election in 2007. We are opposed to the contamination of our water with an 
industrial waste product. 
*	Address the Corporate Exploitation of the Young by alcohol companies. 
*	Encourage Physical Fitness, including Free Sport Coaching out of school 
hours, for all children. Free swimming lessons, during school hours, for all 
children. Protect playing fields. Strengthen the financial status of voluntary sports 
clubs by enabling them to apply for charitable status. 
PRACTICAL TRANSPORT 
Cars are often a necessity and, in themselves, represent freedom. In some areas, a 
reduction in car usage could lead to social fragmentation. People often need cars to be 
kept in touch. Cars, as such, are not a problem.
Over-motoring, however, may be a symptom of another problem. The car may be the best 
work-around there is. We should not address the symptom without addressing the 
underlying problems of poor local infrastructure, over-crowding leading to congestion, 
and poor urban planning. 
Flat Rate Taxes which attempt to address these problems can often hit the poor hardest. 
Therefore, we do not support congestion charging, nor do we support road tolls.
Instead, we promote:
*	Affordable and practical public transport. Public transport should not aim to 
replace private transport since that would create a dependency. Rather it should 
be seen as complementary to private transport, offering all the people of Scotland 
an affordable and practical transport choice. 
*	More investment in rail, light rail and buses. 
*	An increase in park-and-ride facilities. 
*	Research and development into alternative and cleaner forms of fuel - for 
example hydrogen fuel cell technology, especially for buses in towns and cities. 
*	Tax cuts for cleaner fuels and cleaner vehicles. Technology, not taxation, cuts 
pollution. 
*	All students in full-time education to have half-price public transport across 
Scotland. 
*	All pensioners and disabled people to have free public transport across Scotland. 
*	Councils to be encouraged to slash the price of public transport within specific 
city boundaries. 
Fuel Taxes
It is ridiculous that the only oil-producing nation in Europe has the highest fuel prices. 
Car and lorry owners in Britain are the most heavily taxed in Europe. Three-quarters of 
the price at the pump is tax. 
People in the North of Scotland especially, are forced to do more miles than anyone else 
and have to pay more for it. In the Highlands and Islands, petrol since the Budget can 
cost several pence more a litre than in Glasgow. It can take three-quarters of a tank of 
fuel just to get to the nearest fuel pump.
There is often little public transport and you need some sort of vehicle just to maintain 
any quality of life. Clearly, fuel tax hits hardest at those in rural areas, and on low 
incomes. 
We advocate that fuel prices should be subsidised in order to ensure equality of price 
throughout the UK. It does not make any sense to punish car users when cars are often 
their only means of transport. 
Again, we advocate developing improved public transport in order to ensure that people 
have an affordable and practical choice in the matter.
Motorway Building
We need to be pragmatic, not dogmatic. We acknowledge that cars are more efficient 
consumers of fuel at cruising speed, and that they belch out more pollution when stuck in 
congestion. We also note that people don't travel on the motorway just for the fun of it. 
They only use it to get from A to B. Each case must be dealt with on its merits and above 
all, the concerns of the local community must be paramount.
HOUSING FOR ALL 
*	Cancel Local Authority Housing Debt. Each Local Authority has a Public 
Loans Board, which borrows money from the banking sector either directly from 
the banks, or via central government. The Local Authority Housing Debt is the 
debt associated with the Council Housing budget. The Stock Transfer programme 
is an attempt by Local Authorities to offload the debt burden to the private sector 
and the taxpayer. We aim to free Local Authorities of their housing debt by 
advocating the complete cancellation of the fraudulent debt which the banking 
system created out of nothing in the first place. 
*	Support the Right of Tenants to Buy. Tenants should have the right to buy their 
own home, but instead of the money going, by law, to pay off the Local 
Authority Housing Debt, it should go into the Local Authority Housing Revenue 
account to spend locally on housing - either new build, or regeneration - which 
should be in addition to any money already allocated. 
There is nothing wrong with selling council houses to individual tenants who wish 
to buy their homes, so long as the council is maintaining an important 
commitment to the provision of public sector housing. 
*	Oppose Stock Transfer. The maintenance of the council housing stock is vital. It 
is a valuable community asset, without which a local authority has greater 
difficulty and expense tackling homelessness. 
*	Amend Tenant's Choice. Public sector tenants already have a right to choose a 
new landlord provided it is one approved by Communities Scotland (the Scottish 
Executive's housing agency). We suggest amending Tenant's Choice to enable 
tenants to transfer from a Housing Association, back to their Local Authority, if 
the Housing Association is not satisfactory. 
*	Investigate the Affordability of Rents. More and more people are becoming 
dependent upon rented accommodation. We advocate a comprehensive survey of 
rented accommodation which will examine whether people are paying rents that 
are affordable, the percentage of disposable income such rents are consuming, and 
the level at which it should be set in order to lift low income families out of the 
poverty trap. 
*	Refurbish Existing Stock. We advocate high quality public housing, with double 
glazing, central heating, damp-proofing and the installation of high-tech security 
features, including window locks, strong front doors, CCTV cameras and good 
lighting. 
*	Encourage Green Housing. We advocate legislation to ensure all new-build 
housing, whether in the public or private sector, is energy efficient, and includes a 
solar energy content - even in Scotland! 
*	Recycle our Houses. In Glasgow, for example, we already have a wonderful 
housing resource just sitting waiting in buildings which are lying unused because 
nobody can afford the rent. Disused buildings, old warehouses, and premises 
sitting empty from the first floor up, can and should be converted into housing. 
EDUCATION FOR ALL 
Money spent on schools, and "class sizes", can be important determinants for a good 
education, but they are not, in themselves, the only requirements. 
Ultimately, a good education depends upon the culture of the school. If a school has good 
leadership, high staff morale, a positive ethos, good teachers, discipline, well-behaved 
children, and proven teaching methods, then more can be accomplished than with money 
and small class sizes alone. 
If a school does not have these essentials then you can throw money at it, and you can 
reduce class sizes as much as you like, but you'll still be turning out children who can't 
read, write, add-up or do their times-tables.
*	We Support Parental Choice. Parents have a right to decide how best to educate 
their children. This includes Private Schooling, Faith Schooling, Single-sex 
Schooling, Local Schooling and Home Schooling. 
However, while we support the Parents' Choice to send their children to whatever 
school they want, we also recognise that many parents do not have the luxury of 
a choice, and therefore our aim should be to raise all schools up to the level of the 
best schools.
*	Full student grants and tuition fees for everyone. 
*	Oppose top-up fees. 
*	All students in full time education to receive half-price public transport 
across Scotland. 
*	We Support a Programme of Investment in Public Libraries. A good library 
is a Street Corner University. Glasgow is presently leading the way in upgrading 
and expanding its library facilities and demonstrating its commitment to life-long 
learning. See for example, Anniesland Library. 
IRAQ WAR 
No Foreign Wars for Foreign Causes
We support our brave servicemen and women, whose purpose is the defence of our 
country, not fighting for foreign interests. We are opposed to the Iraq War.
We see Britain's involvement as a consequence of subservience to the US/Israel strategy 
for domination in the Middle East.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR MILITARY ACTION
*	British Armed Forces are for the National Interest not a Foreign Interest. 
Our Forces are for the defence of British national interests, at home and abroad, 
which includes our people wherever they may be, our territory and borders, and 
our vital strategic interests worldwide. No foreign wars for foreign causes! 
*	Containment and Deterrence before Armed Conflict. Armed conflict is 
unnecessary when a threat is effectively contained or deterred. Saddam's regime 
was very effectively contained. There was no way possible for him to invade 
another country or drop bombs on anyone. The strategies of containment and 
deterrence served their purposes effectively. The use of force was unnecessary. 
*	Armed Conflict only when there is Clear and Present Danger to the National 
Interest. 
*	In the Event of Armed Conflict, the Aim must be Clear, and Possible to 
Achieve, and there must be a Safe Exit-Strategy. 
Our policy of "No Foreign Wars for Foreign Causes" would decrease the risk of terrorism 
in the UK.

FOREIGN AID: PRINCIPLES and PURPOSE 
This year a well-funded and publicised campaign has been started called Make Poverty 
History. According to its website makepovertyhistory.org it has 3 aims, summed up in 9 
words: Trade Justice, Drop the Debt. More and Better Aid. It wants the Foreign Aid 
budget to be 0.7% of UK Gross National Income.
Some say that Britain should cancel its Foreign Aid budget altogether and not bother 
sending money to countries with a long record of political and economic failure. 
Further, there is opposition to the idea that these countries are getting "handouts" and we 
get nothing in return, but higher tax bills.
Others resent some of the subtle implications that we, in the developed world, should 
somehow feel guilty for living in societies which are successful enough to feed, water 
and house their peoples -- as if this was a lucky quirk of fate or the result of 
"exploitation", rather than the consequences of hundreds of years of our ancestors 
hard labour, organisation and invention. 
However, there is nothing wrong with Foreign Aid per se and there is much to commend 
it, if it is applied properly. 
That is, a Foreign Aid package should flow from a principled political position intended 
to achieve key objectives in the interests of both the receiver and sender.
Let us examine these Principles and Purposes:
THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF FOREIGN AID 
PRINCIPLE 1: Foreign Aid must be a Tool of Diplomacy not an Act of Charity 
We do not take a paternalistic view of other countries. We recognise other countries 
may need our help and expertise, and often we can provide this, but we expect them to 
stand on their own feet and help themselves. Tough love, not naïve sentimentality is the 
driving emotion.
PRINCIPLE 2: Foreign Aid must be a Mutually Beneficial Process  
Quid pro Quo. If we give, we must also get. There must be something in it for us and we 
must not lose out. There must be tangible benefits for our country, people and common 
good, not merely profits for the multi-national corporations who have no loyalty to this 
country.
PRINCIPLE 3: Foreign Aid must be Withdrawn or Reduced if a Relationship, or 
Aspects of it, is not Mutually Beneficial 
For example, in the USA, Congresswoman Jo Ann Davis (R-Va) introduced legislation 
in 2004 called the "Country of Origin Healthcare Accountability Act" intended to deduct 
the cost of medical care to illegal aliens from the foreign aid allotment received by 
their native countries. 
"There are over 8 million illegal aliens in the United States, and health care treatment of 
illegal aliens imposes a substantial cost on medical providers and hospitals in many 
American communities. This cost should be shouldered by these foreign countries, not 
with US healthcare dollars", she said. 
www.joanndavis.com/pressreleases/052504immigranthealth.cfm
This principle recognises that countries which allow their citizens to come here 
illegally should pay for them. 
THE PURPOSES OF FOREIGN AID 
PURPOSE 1: To Build Self-Reliance Worldwide 
Self-Determination is for export. We believe in it for our own country and we believe in 
it for all countries. 
Thus we believe in Foreign Aid for Self-Reliance intended to ensure the recipient is 
enabled to stand on its own feet and free itself from dependency on outside forces. 
PURPOSE 2: To Achieve Benefits for Ourselves 
These may be measured in terms of mutually beneficial trading arrangements, diplomatic 
and strategic favours, or in terms of fewer economic migrants, and "asylum seekers" 
arriving on our shores. 
For example, it should be the long-term aim of a properly directed Foreign Aid 
programme to stem the flow of economic migrants and "asylum seekers", as the poor 
countries become more economically and politically stable.
At the same time, the money saved by ending economic migration disguised as "asylum 
seeking", could be used as part of the Foreign Aid budget intended to help countries 
develop Self-Reliant economies.
HOW BEST TO ACHIEVE THESE GOALS 
Directing Foreign Aid for the specific objective of increasing National Self-Reliance can 
often be done best by directing aid at local grass-roots organisations which are more 
conscious of small-scale local needs, rather than pouring it into the top where it can be 
flushed away by profligate heads of state, endemic corruption or unsustainable corporate 
activity.
To the extent that Foreign Aid programmes are tied to neo-liberal economic dogma -- 
which promotes cash cropping, forces markets open for commodity dumping, grants 
unlimited access for multi-national corporations, prevents their proper regulation, 
liberalises financial markets, forces dependency on foreign investment, promotes further 
borrowing, restricts social spending, and encourages the privatisation and deregulation of 
public assets -- then they do not promote National Self-Reliance, but rather national 
dependence. 
Thus, Foreign Aid for Self-Reliance requires changes to the economic philosophy which 
presently dominates, led by the WTO, World Bank and IMF.
As Dr Caroline Lucas MEP has written: "The only way of 'challenging' globalisation is 
to replace its current goal of ever greater international competitiveness at any cost with 
a new aim of protecting and rebuilding sustainable local economies in both rich and 
poor countries. This would require a complete overhaul of the WTO's rules." (Letters, 
The Guardian, 25-11-04)
OBJECTIONS  
"Foreign Aid money goes to dictators and is wasted" 
It is true that Foreign Aid has encouraged misrule and conflict in the past, but that does 
not mean that Foreign Aid, per se, is wrong, only that it has been mis-applied. 
"We should trade, not give aid" 
Yes, trade can often be a way of helping a country although we have to consider our own 
interests too. 
For example, we can't necessarily trade with a country if it undermines our own British 
producers, or our favoured producers elsewhere in the world. 
Furthermore, international trade is not necessarily in the best interests of the developing 
country if it is merely producing cash-crops for export in order to earn foreign currency. 
In all cases, our Foreign Aid package should be directed to build-up the country's 
intrinsic Self-Reliance in basic needs.
DEBT RELIEF 
Building National Economic Self-Reliance 
We believe in self-determination for the UK and we believe in it for all countries.
To be effective, the cancellation of debt in any country has to be part of an overall 
strategy to enable the country to stand on its own feet. It has to be part of an overall 
strategy to build long-term self-reliance. 
Simply abolishing a country's debt in the short-term, but keeping it chained to the debt-
based money system in the long-term, is to keep it enslaved to the global financial 
system.
Thus, in coordination with debt-relief we advocate the following measures, which are 
applicable to all countries:
FIVE ESSENTIAL ACTS OF NATIONAL ECONOMIC SOVEREIGNTY
1.	A measure of foreign exchange control, to prevent a nation's reserves, its 
financial lifeblood, from being sucked out by speculators. 
2.	Reverse the progressive liberalisation of financial markets, as this advance 
towards a global economy can rob developing peoples of the benefits of their own 
national resources. 
3.	No privatization of national assets as a device for paying off government 
debt. Such assets belong to the people, and should not be put up for auction, 
where market forces can consign them to foreign ownership. British experience of 
privatisation proves that selling assets to reduce national debt is only a temporary 
expedient. They can only be sold off once, and when they are gone, the cycle of 
debt and borrowing continues. 
4.	Avoid further borrowing, particularly in US dollars. The recent round of 
currency devaluations has shown this to be a treacherous device whereby 
international entrepreneurs can buy up the local economy at bargain prices. 
5.	Create own money debt-free. Money incentives to stimulate commerce, 
agriculture, industry and social programmes, need not be in the form of expensive 
US dollars. All recognised, legitimate governments can create their own debt-free 
money and use it for essential national objectives. 
These five acts: Stopping the haemorrhage of national reserves by means of exchange 
controls; reversing the liberalisation of financial markets; rejecting the privatisation of 
public assets; avoiding foreign loans or further borrowing; and steadfastly maintaining 
social programmes, with government created debt-free money if necessary -- are essential 
acts of national economic sovereignty. 
The technicalities of cancelling developing world debt are explained here. 
BUILDING DEMOCRACY 
*	Abolition of All-Postal, and Postal-on-Request Voting, and No "Electronic" 
Voting 
The All-Postal method should be abolished entirely, and Postal Voting on Request 
-- for people who are not disabled, housebound, or otherwise absent for good 
reason -- should be abolished also. These forms of Postal Voting are destroying 
the integrity of our democracy. Electronic voting is highly vulnerable to hackers 
and should not be considered at all. 
*	Local Referenda for Local Issues. 
Extend local democracy and empower local people. We advocate the 
establishment of a system of local referenda, which will enable referenda to be 
held on a ward basis, which will allow both sides to present their cases equally, 
and which will be binding upon the council. Parish referendums, which are 
already available in England, should be legally binding, and this facility should be 
extended to the rest of the UK. 
The principle here is that the local people should be the lawmakers. Their needs 
must come first. The local authority must work with them to determine what the 
people want, rather than impose a top-down approach.
*	Proportional Representation for Local Elections. 
In Glasgow, at the local elections in 1999, the Labour Party won less than 50% of 
the vote, but took 94% of the seats. Parties other than Labour occupied only 5 of 
the 79 seats. 
PR in local elections will herald a virtual revolution in Scottish politics. We 
support an element of PR in the electoral system because it enables new voices to 
be elected and heard, and is a way to change the first-past-the-post plutocracy.
TAX POLICY 
*	REPLACE COUNCIL TAX WITH A LOCAL INCOME TAX, which is built 
into the normal Income Tax payment. It's fairer and it's easier to adjust and 
collect. 
This means that Income Tax will consist of a local tax aspect as well as a national 
tax aspect. Each Local Authority will determine how much Local Income Tax it is 
going to levy. It will all be collected by the Inland Revenue from the same wage 
packet. 
What we pay will be reflected in our income, not our house size, or the area in 
which we live. We will be taxed on our income band, not our property band, or 
geographical area. All incomes below £15,000 automatically exempt.
It is the simplest tax to collect because everything is already set up. The Inland 
Revenue already has the details, it can be taken out of our wage-packet before we 
receive it, and nobody is able to escape paying. It provides an element of stability 
and certainty because it is predictable. People know how much they will be 
paying depending upon their salary.
*	CHANGEOVER TO DEBT-FREE FUNDING 
A national economy with an ongoing policy of maintaining itself through the 
leeching of trained and skilled personnel from other countries, can have no long-
term future. With a debt-free Public Investment Bank able to create debt-free 
money at no expense to the taxpayer, the fiscal requirement -- for infrastructural 
and essential projects, for genuinely beneficial things like roads, sewers, small 
local hospitals, Home Helps, and the recycling technology known as Swerfing; 
but not for the present and ever-expanding army of pc-compliance apparatchiks, 
profiteering control-freak surveillance of the entire population, importing asylum 
seekers, or the proliferation of so-called Development Agencies with crony fatcat 
executives and various other associated parasites in tow -- would at a stroke be 
near enough halved.
Indeed, were the undesirable and ideologically motivated agencies to be 
abolished, taxes could immediately be reduced even without a changeover to 
debt-free funding.
*	INDIRECT TAXES ARE UNFAIR 
The so-called "indirect taxes" advocated by some parties tend to hit the less 
affluent an awful lot more than they do the rich. For instance, John Prescott isn't 
really much bothered if as a result of Gordon Brown's taxation, fuel goes up in 
price since he has lots of money. But someone on a low income would be hit 
disproportionately hard by the same rise. IGV does not consider a comparatively 
high rate of such indirect taxation to be a viable or fair basis upon which to collect 
finance for national or local government.

