Plaid Cymru - The Party of Wales Manifesto 2001 
Preface 
The election we are facing is a crucial one for Wales. 
In the first election since the establishment of the National Assembly it is more important than ever before that we strengthen the presence of the Party of Wales at Westminster. 
Wales may have had a measure of devolution but our laws are still made in London, and a strong presence of members of a party that is free to put the interests of Wales first, is essential. 
An important part of our work will be to scrutinise legislation at Westminster to give the Assembly an opportunity to adapt it to the needs of Wales. 
Similarly we are also needed to push forward the process of devolution and constitutional reform. One of our priorities will therefore be to introduce a bill that will give the Assembly legislative powers, on the lines of the Scottish Parliament. 
The economic and social message of the Party of Wales will be equally important in the election. 
With New Labour adopting more and more Tory policies, and the Tories moving ever further to the right, the need for such a party as Plaid Cymru to speak up for social justice is urgent. 
It gives me great pleasure to present a manifesto that has been prepared with the specific purpose of meeting the needs of Wales, and I ask for your support in ensuring a strong voice for the interests of Wales during the coming parliamentary term. 
Elfyn Llwyd 
Plaid Cymru The Party of Wales Parliamentary Leader 
The Main Themes of the election of 2001 
Introduction by Ieuan Wyn Jones President Plaid Cymru The Party of Wales 
The people of Wales have a clear choice in this coming election. 
Since the last Westminster election in 1997 the political landscape has changed radically following the introduction of devolution in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. And there is no doubt that the most significant political change in Wales over this period has been the growth of the Party of Wales, which has had an opportunity to play a more prominent part in the life of our nation than ever in its history. As well as operating as the main opposition in the National Assembly, we control three local councils, have an important presence on councils throughout Wales, and hold two of the five European seats in Wales. 
As we strengthen our position in the political mainstream, it has become increasingly evident to the people of Wales that we are the party to stand up for their interests, and for the interests of Wales at several different tiers of government. The clear message in this election is that we, and we alone, are the party to stand up for their interests at the Westminster Parliament too. 
There are two principal themes that are central to our election campaign - the need for a fairer economic and social policy on the one hand, and for adequate powers for Wales on the other. 
The new millennium has started at a time that is exciting in many ways for Wales. 
Obtaining a measure of devolution through the establishment of the National Assembly was an important step forward for us as a nation, realising the aspiration of generations of our compatriots. Hand in hand with this political evolution the general growth in awareness of Welshness has continued, and this vitality is evident in many aspects of our cultural life. 
Yet, the growth in our sense of identity and self-confidence as a nation is not reflected in the economic condition of Wales. In fact our country has suffered deeply in the wake of the policies of the last 20 years and more. 
The enormous damage done to the economy of Wales during the 18 years of Tory governments that were forced on the people of Wales is evident to all. What is disappointing to many is that New Labour has pursued similar policies since the historic victory of 1997. 
Recent blows suffered by manufacturing, steel in particular, demonstrate the savage effects of the Blair-Brown policy agenda on our economy and communities. 
The centre-right mindset in favour of low public expenditure which currently dominates politics in Britain has led to the fact that Britain is the most unequal state in Europe. 
This inequality is evident geographically as well as socially. Since Wales is a poor region compared with the whole of the United Kingdom, policies that favour the rich have dealt us a particularly heavy blow. 
Along with the inequality in wealth, low public spending has led to a serious deterioration in our public services, and the state of our health service is a deplorable for a developed country. 
Challenging this centre-right mindset in British politics is central for any party wishing to improve the lives of the people of Wales. In addition to being a core element of our most important values as a nation, fighting for a fairer society is an essential part of protecting our interests. 
A key demand in this election campaign will be for reform in the way Wales is funded. 
In view of our deteriorating economy, our poor health record and the higher than average proportion of elderly in our population, we need a system which gives more consideration to the needs of Wales instead of the Barnett formula which decides the budget of the National Assembly. We call also for the implementation of economic and monetary policies which will enable Wales to achieve its economic potential. 
Our great task as a party will be to take forward the devolution process. Plaid Cymru sees the establishment of the National Assembly as the beginning of a process of taking increasing responsibility for our own fate. But it has become increasingly evident over the last two years that there are fundamental weaknesses in the current constitutional arrangements. The lack of clarity concerning the powers of the Assembly has seriously hampered its operation. 
Legislative powers are a must - and as soon as possible - to enable it to function properly. To this end, the Party of Wales will introduce a bill to give Wales a legislative parliament similar to that of Scotland. 
We are also determined to see Wales having a greater voice in Europe. Far reaching changes will occur over the coming years, and how the European Union evolves is of the greatest import to Wales. 
In a rapidly shrinking world, in which globalisation consistently erodes the nation-state's traditional power, we see the increasing trend towards unity in Europe as an opportunity, not a threat. However, we must continue to press for reforms in the institutions of the European Union which will make it more democratic, and which will permit a greater voice for Wales and small nations and regions throughout Europe. The Party of Wales has a unique contribution to offer in this election. We are the only party to be able to guarantee complete loyalty to Wales. At the same time, our economic and social message is relevant to the whole of Britain, as is our call for more global co-operation and for a foreign policy that seeks to create a fairer and more peaceful world. 
This then is the political agenda we shall be pushing over the next parliamentary term, and Party of Wales Members of Parliament will collaborate with other members of similar intent towards realising different aspects of it. 
This manifesto offers an ambitious vision together with practical plans and policies, identifying us as a party which, while aiming high, has its feet firmly on the ground. 
We invite all who have the welfare of Wales at heart to join with us in the task of ensuring justice and a confident national future for our country. 
IEUAN WYN JONES 
President Plaid Cymru The Party of Wales 
Section 3 
A Civilised Society 
Although economic prosperity is essential, a civilised and successful society needs something more. Everyone will benefit if it also has a foundation of humanitarian values that will take responsibility for the welfare, health and security of all the members of that society. 
3 (i) Health and social services 
The first and most important thing to remember is that promotion of good health is an issue that belongs to all areas of policy. 
In particular we need greater awareness of the link between poverty and social disadvantage and illness. We need to realise that tackling poverty pays a hundredfold in terms of the welfare of the society as well as cost-effectiveness. 
Similarly, environmental health and public health need a higher profile, and better co-ordination between health and social services is also needed. 
The Party of Wales is totally committed to the principle that sickness treatment services should be available free at the point of delivery. We oppose the trend towards private provision and we shall call for the abolition of any tax incentives towards it. 
Although the National Assembly is responsible for most of the work of running the health service in Wales, the most important decisions concerning health expenditure will still be taken at Westminster. 
The National Health Service is today in a parlous condition because of the lack of investment that goes back many years. As has already been mentioned, health is a policy area in which New Labour has been particularly guilty of creating the impression that they are providing more resources than is in fact the case. There has been a cynical tendency for any additional money to be double-counted and repeated in a way that creates the impression that every sum is new money. There are also too many superficial measures, such as health tzars, walk-in centres and guaranteed waiting times that do not get to the root of the real problems. 
It is also important to note that Wales has suffered particularly badly from the lack of investment. 
The level of sickness is higher here as a result of poverty, the effects of heavy industries such as lung diseases in former coal miners, and also a higher than average proportion of elderly people. 
Wales's record on cancer and heart disease is among the worst, and we must have adequate resources to tackle this. 
Central to our demands in the election will be a call for an increase in the UK's spending on health to bring it to levels which correspond to the other countries of Europe. 
We also demand that funding for Wales correspond to our needs, in accordance with the reforms we recommend for the Barnett formula. 
We call for the abolition of Trusts, the last remnant of the internal market. The number of doctors, nurses and other health professionals in NHS wales needs to be substantially increased. However the Westminster parliament retains control over pay and conditions and the number of training place available. 
As part of our belief in the democratisation of the health service, we call for the functions of the community health councils to be retained and strengthened. 
*  Social care 
We shall call upon the government to follow the Government of Scotland's praiseworthy example and implement the Royal Commission's recommendations on long-term care for the elderly. 
We condemn the UK Government's refusal to act in the same way. Their recommendations will create an artificial boundary between personal care in hospital and in residential homes, and between health care and personal care. This is bound to lead to inconsistency and unfairness: more post code lottery. 
It is crucial that we move towards greater integration between social care and health. 
*  Children and families 
The Party of Wales was the first to argue for additional powers for the Children's Commissioner in Wales and we will continue to press for further powers, especially over non-devolved asnd cross-border issues. Improving the quality and availability of foster-care must be a high priority for children's services, as must the training of childcare staff and foster parents. We shall continue to press for the development of comprehensive advocacy services. 
3 (ii) Pensions and Social Security 
The present government's record on poverty has been appalling. In spite of the promises to create change, it is a fact that there has been an increase in the number of people living in poverty during the first two years of the government, and the number of pensioners living in poverty has increased substantially. The inherent gender discrimination in the present system must be abolished. 
*  Social Security 
The eradication of poverty and social exclusion entails the transformation of the social security system and attitudes towards it. 
In order to raise the poor out of poverty benefit levels should be raised, while at the same time increasing all incentives to return to work to break the social exclusion cycle and to avoid a culture of dependency. 
We welcome some initiatives therefore such as the Working Families Tax Credit, and the increase in child benefits, but we deplore New Labour's right wing attitude since it came into power. Linking benefit with inflation rather than average income has widened the gap increasingly, and the emphasis on means testing and targeting has caused stigma amongst many. 
We recognise the need to combat fraud, but this government's heavy-handed attitude has created anxiety and suffering to the truly needy. Even more serious, in the effort to keep cost down, there is firm evidence that claimants are kept in ignorance of the benefits due to them. 
Party of Wales MPs will therefore call for measures to help claimants get their due benefits, including restoring the helplines for claimants which were cut by the Tories, and ensuring that an impartial adequately funded advisory service is available for everybody. 
Benefits for the disabled should acknowledge the additional costs of living for the disabled people. The right to the mobility element of the Living Allowance for the Disabled should continue after retirement age. The Winter Fuel Scheme should be extended to include disabled people under 60. 
In order to facilitate the move from benefit to work, the rate of Working Families' Tax Credit clawback must be reduced. It is utterly unreasonable for the credit to be reduced by 55p for every £1 earned, while the well off only have to pay 40% income tax. Similarly the taper for Housing Benefit and Council Tax should be reduced. 
Raising the maximum part time earnings for people on Income Support would achieve the same objective. 
There is also scope for simplifying the application process for Working Families' Tax Credit in order to reduce the bureaucratic burden on applicants and small employers. 
The compulsory payments on Social Fund loans drive those who are already very poor below the poverty line. Social Fund payments should be made as grants which have been carefully assessed on the basis of need. 
*  Compensation for former coal miners 
This government's treatment of former coal miners has been shameful. During the three years since winning the right to compensation thousands of former coal miners have died before getting their due. 
We shall press the government to take steps without delay to expedite the process of paying well deserved compensation to a group of people who have given so much during their lives. 
Specifically, we shall press for the deployment of more medical staff to deal effectively with the applications, and also for the Department of Trade and Industry to accept their responsibility fully in accordance with the High Court's decision instead of trying to avoid paying in full. 
The clawback system, whereby the Department of Health and Social Security claim back a proportion of the compensation, causing more misery to former coal miners as they have to keep fighting in the courts, must also be abolished. 
A similar compensation scheme should be established for former slate quarrymen who have suffered from emphysema, chronic bronchitis and asthma arising from their employment, and their widows. 
*  Pensions 
After the fierce opposition to the insulting increase of 75p a week for pensioners last year, the government has been forced to award a more substantial increase on the threshold of an election. 
Yet pensioners are still a long way from enjoying their share of the increased wealth of the country, and surveys suggest that three out of every five pensioners in Wales live either at poverty level or beneath it. 
One of the main reasons for this poverty is that thousands of pensioners do not claim the means tested addition to the pension, and therefore lose £18.80 each a week on average. 
We shall call for an adequate retirement pension which will be available to everybody without a means test, and which will increase in line with earnings. 
We welcome the new stakeholder pension, but call for tighter rules in order to prevent its use as a means of tax-avoidance. 
*  3 (iii) Law and order 
In spite of their empty words about fighting crime and the causes of crime, the present government's efforts to tackle poverty and social exclusion seriously, which are recognised as among the main causes of crime, have been few and far between. 
In addition, because of their over-eagerness to appear 'hard' on criminals, important aspects of civil rights have been consistently eroded. 
We shall strongly oppose any restriction on the right to receive legal aid, and we shall continue to oppose the abolition of the right to trial by jury. 
*  The police, the courts and crime 
We shall press for the Assembly to be given responsibility for the police and emergency services in Wales, in order to place more emphasis on community policing, and in order to link emergency services with policies in the field of social development. 
We are also committed to protecting lay magistrates as a system that is accountable to the local community, to protecting courts that are in danger of closing, and to increasing the use of Welsh as well as training to enable this. 
We challenge the damaging consensus between New Labour and the Tories on prison policy. The UK imprisons a higher percentage of the population than any other country in Europe, and is becoming increasingly similar to the American pattern. 
While we accept the use of imprisonment in order to protect society from dangerous criminals, we have to acknowledge also that too many people are currently being sent to prison. 
There is sound evidence that at least a third of the prison population are people who should not be there at all. For example, prison is a totally inappropriate punishment for the high percentage of criminals who have mental health problems, and many women are imprisoned for trivial offences like non-payment of fines. 
Overcrowding also leads to all kinds of serious problems from frequent use of drugs to a high level of suicide. 
It also undermines the work of restoring prisoners to a condition of positive citizenship. 
Drawing attention to the failures of prisons does not mean being soft towards criminals. However sooner or later society will have to acknowledge the truth that it is a totally ineffective way of dealing with most crimes. 
It is an undoubted fact that offenders are more likely to reoffend after being in prison, and the high cost of £25,000 a year for keeping a person in prison is extremely inefficient. Reducing the prison population to what it was in the mid-1990s would save £500 million a year. 
We shall 
*  Ensure more effective policing in the community by employing more police officers on the beat 
*  Call for more extensive use of community non-custodial sentences, taking full advantage of the opportunities for surveillance that are offered by new technological developments, such as tagging offenders. 
*  Call for a women's prison to be established in Wales. 
*  Victim Support 
There must be better support for the victims of crime, including placing a duty on local authorities to provide shelters for the victims of domestic violence and adequate funding for counselling services for the victims of rape and sexual abuse. 
Education about domestic violence should also be increased, and protection from rape should be strengthened in relation to claims of consent. 
Similarly, there is a need to increase provision for those who are addicted to drugs and alcohol and to ensure adequate resources for education. 
We also recommend that a Royal Commission be established to investigate the whole issue of drug abuse and the law, while recognising the great damage caused by alcohol misuse. 
On cannabis for medicinal purposes, a decision should await the completion of the current inquiry. 
*  Human rights and Equality 
We call for a credible Freedom of Information Bill; we welcome the Human Rights Act and call for the European Union's Charter of Fundamental Rights to be incorporated into the European Treaty. 
We demand a comprehensive review of all equality legislation to ensure consistency, changes of sex discrimination law to make positive action easier, stronger enforcement of equal pay legislation, and the early extension of equality legislation to meet the requirements of the Amsterdam Treaty. 
We also support the right for unmarried partners to register their partnership and have property, pension and inheritance rights. 
*  Immigration and Refugees 
It is time for society to start seeing immigrants as a resource with extremely important potential rather than just as a problem. The ethnic minority communities in Wales have made an important contribution to our development as a nation, and notwithstanding the genuine concern about cases of racist attacks, many of our communities are praiseworthy examples of people from very different backgrounds living together happily. 
While migration is a wholly natural feature of life in the modern world, we have to remember too that much of it is forced on the countries of the world through poverty. The only way to keep it under control in the long term is by tackling the problem of the dreadful inequality between the developed world and the rest. 
In the meantime we shall press for a civilised attitude towards refugees. We should remember that every refugee seeking asylum is a human being and deserves to be treated fairly and honestly and with respect. It is imperative that support should be offered to refugees who have suffered torture or who have reason to fear persecution. 
We call for the voucher system to be abolished, for adequate resources to expedite the processing of applications for asylum, and for the present system of keeping asylum seekers in prison to be brought to an end. 
We believe that Wales should play its part in welcoming a fair share of refugees to our midst, and we shall press for adequate resources from central government to meet their needs. 
Key Recommendations 
A substantial increase in expenditure on health to levels nearer to other European countries. 
A higher proportion of funding for Wales to meet our greater need, and to enable cancer and heart disease to be targeted 
Non-means-tested long term personal care for the elderly 
Measures to help benefit claimants to get information about their rights 
Expediting the process of paying compensation to coal miners and an end to benefit clawback from those payments 
Increasing pensions in keeping with earnings 
More non-custodial penalties, taking advantage of the possibilities offered by modern technology for surveillance of offenders 
More community police 
Section 4 
Shared Power 
Willingness to share power is essential to ensure good governance in the modern world. A rational distribution of powers between different tiers of government, from the local community to a global level, will be needed. 
As we have already noted, the principle of subsidiarity, taking decisions as closely to the people as possible, is central to the Party of Wales's principles. 
We shall therefore press the devolution process ahead in order to ensure increasing power over their own future for the people of Wales. The regeneration of local government, absolutely necessary for a healthy democracy, will be part of the same process. 
At the same time, we see the need for more international collaboration in fields such as the environment, defence and financial control. In addition to more unity in Europe, this means increasing global action. 
4 (i) Full legislative powers for Wales 
The Party of Wales's main demand in terms of constitutional reform during the next parliament will be for full legislative powers for the National Assembly on a pattern similar to the Scottish parliament. 
As explained in chapter 2, the current constitutional order is totally unsatisfactory. 
The Party of Wales will introduce a bill to provide full legislative powers for the National Assembly in all of its areas of responsibility, together with additional areas such as the police and railways. 
The Assembly should also have tax raising powers and a clear distinction between the executive and the legislature. As with the Scotland Act, the new Wales Act should leave the door open for further devolution within the UK framework. This would mean an increase in the number of Members and the resources to serve them. Resources should be transferred from Westminster to meet the cost of this increase. 
*  A civil service for Wales 
We shall also press for progress towards the development of an integrated public service for local government, the Assembly and other public bodies in Wales. This would enable a national career structure to be created along with wider mutual understanding and a spirit of partnership between government levels. We would want to keep close links with the other civil services of the islands of Britain and the European Commission and regular secondments could be used as one way of ensuring this. 
4 (ii) Restoring local democracy 
We do not think that the principle of subsidiarity should end with a Welsh parliament; since dynamic and lively local government is crucial to democracy. 
Local government is in crisis because governments since the 1970s have assumed powers for areas such as further education, health, fire and housing, and have restricted councils' freedom to operate in the remaining areas. Financial autonomy has been undermined. It is no surprise therefore that voting levels in local elections have deteriorated, and the number of candidates has diminished. 
We believe in a truly local government, and that as much autonomy as possible should be permitted to local authorities with as little central direction as possible on expenditure priorities and hypethecation. 
The opportunity should also be given for councils to provide services if they give best value should be increased. 
We support the introduction of a local income tax to provide funding for local government and call for a timetable to be set for the implementation of this. 
Giving the Assembly full legislative powers would enable us to design a pattern of local government that is appropriate to the circumstances of Wales. 
The proposed Local Government Act causes great concern as it takes powers from the Assembly and gives them to the Secretary of State. We shall do everything to oppose this disgraceful effort to undermine devolution. It is a clear example of the need for full legislative powers. 
We are in favour of increasing the voice of local authorities in the selection of members of bodies such as Police, ambulance and fire authorities. It is important to introduce measures to increase public influence on councils' policies, together with adequate training for backbenchers to do their work effectively. 
*  Unelected public bodies 
The accountability of quangos has improved since the establishment of the Assembly, but the promised bonfire has hardly taken place. The justification for their existence, and democratic methods of fulfilling their functions, need to be thoroughly examined,. 
4 (iii) Unity in Europe 
The Plaid Cymru will seek every possible opportunity to strengthen Wales's status and influence within the European Union. 
As we have already noted in section 1 (iii), this includes ensuring that Wales can play a part in the negotiations on further reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, for instance. 
Strong Welsh representation within the current structures is also essential. This includes strengthening the Wales European Centre to act as an embassy for Wales in the European Union, a strong presence in UKRep and the appropriate Assembly Secretary to speak directly for Wales at the Council of Ministers. Similarly, it is important to increase the Assembly's capacity to scrutinise European legislation. 
In addition to advancing the interests of our country from day to day, we also want Wales to have a voice in the political development of our continent. We have already noted our support for the process of European unity, but more needs to be done to underpin the principle of subsidiarity. 
We shall support with enthusiasm every call for reform of the institutions of the European Union, including a written constitution for the Union and the inclusion of a Charter of Fundamental Rights in the European Treaty. 
As has already been noted, the reforms we are seeking include strengthening democratic accountability by transferring legislative powers to a bicameral parliament - with one chamber elected directly and the other indirectly by regions and nation-regions who have their own parliaments and assemblies. 
The 2004 Inter-governmental will take place during the Conference in the next parliamentary term, and we shall give priority to pressing for Wales to have a place in such a chamber. 
*  Economic and Monetary Union 
Undoubtedly, this will be one of the most important issues the next parliament will have to tackle. The Party of Wales regards the achievement of economic and monetary union in Europe as one of the cornerstones of our economic policy. In a world where global economic forces undermine the ability of national governments to intervene effectively in the macro-economy, economic collaboration across Europe is essential in order to regain democratic control over social and economic policy. 
We do not see Economic and Monetary Union as a step in a relentless drive towards globalisation, but rather as a barrier against the unfettered power of international capital, and in favour of progressive social and economic values. Without the greater capacity to examine public objectives that a truly democratic Economic and Monetary Union has to offer, our people's demand for satisfying work and a fair wage, acceptable services and a clean environment remain at the mercy of financial speculators and international de-investment. 
We support joining the Euro when the exchange rate with the pound is appropriate. Wales has suffered from Britain's decision to stay out of the single currency. The fact is that the structure of the economy of Wales is more like that of the European mainland than is that of southern England. 
At the same time we cannot ignore the dangers of operating uniform monetary policies across a whole continent. Wales has suffered greatly from such an approach in the United Kingdom. The success of EMU in our opinion therefore depends on the following: 
*  The Central European Bank's accountability to parliament; 
*  Addition of full employment and the prevention of regional inequality to its remit: 
*  Adequate resources earmarked for inter-regional transfers. 
4 (iv) External security 
Military expenditure has cost Britain's economy dear, and the economic gain from the investment has benefited only the prosperous areas of Southern England. We shall press for a reduction in military expenditure to a level similar to the European average (from 3.2% to 2.3% in 1998) as part of the global process of reducing military expenditure. 
The £24 billion on military expenditure should be compared with the mere £2.7 billion spent on international development programmes in the current year. 
We regard the UK's high expenditure on military defence as a sign of its failure to shake itself free of its imperialist mindset. We believe that the UK must come to terms with its limitations as a power on the world stage, and indeed the ability of any nation-state to deal with the challenges facing them in the 21st century. 
We therefore welcome moves towards more collaboration between the countries of the European Union on external security policies. Such a policy should give priority to conflict-prevention and peace-keeping and should be based on democratic and non-nuclear cooperation as set out in the St Petersburg tasks . 
To this end we support the principle of creating an European armed force, but we shall press for assurances that where the force operates outside Europe it will do so in order to keep the peace and not to protect the interests of the countries of Europe. 
We also believe that it is the European Union that should be represented on the UN's Security Council rather than Britain and France. 
The USA's threat to proceed with the development of a Missile Defence System ('son of star wars') causes considerable concern. It is a dangerous step towards restarting the arms race, and contravenes the Global Test-ban Treaty. We shall oppose strongly any move by the government towards Britain's participation in the scheme. 
4 (v) One world 
The Party of Wales is totally committed to the principle of world citizenship, and we support moves towards global governance in order to deal with some of the huge problems facing mankind. 
Amongst the problems we have to tackle at a global level are issues such as the environmental crisis, epidemics, control of the arms market, gender equality, financial and economic stability in an age of globalisation, and the inequality of wealth that leaves so many of our fellow citizens in famine and poverty. The eradication of poverty must be at the heart of all international policy. 
As a step towards creating a fairer world we shall press for an ethical foreign policy, which was promised by New Labour but not delivered. 
*  International security 
The United Nations must be strengthened so that it can operate much more effectively to prevent wars. It is too dependent on the contributions of large corporations, and the attempt by powerful countries such as USA to keep it deliberately weak must be resisted. 
We also call for an international agreement to abolish the production, testing and use of nuclear arms. 
Similarly, we press for much tighter regulation of the international arms market, with effective monitoring at a global level. 
Britain should take lead in this, with arms brokering regulated by making it necessary to register and license every deal, and making increased parliamentary scrutiny of arms export licenses a requirement. 
A substantial tax should be placed on arms producers with the revenue hypothecated to pay for clearing explosives left by wars. 
*  The environment 
As pollution and environmental damage have no respect for political boundaries, stronger control at an international level to enforce compliance is an imperative. 
Protecting the climate of the planet is one of the most important challenges of our age. With new evidence of climate change, there is an increasing realisation that human activities endanger the health of the environment to such a degree that the quality of our lives, and even our survival as a species, is put in jeopardy. 
CO2 levels in the atmosphere have increased 30% since the Industrial Revolution and the level of emissions is still rising. If present trends continue scientists estimate that atmospheric temperature will rise 6 degrees Celsius during this century - the greatest increase during the past 10,000 years. 
International institutions are currently totally inadequate for the task of implementing the resolutions of the Kyoto Earth Summit, for instance, and there are none that are powerful enough to counterbalance the power of international companies. The fossil fuel industry has quite deliberately set about undermining the Kyoto process. 
We shall call upon the government of Britain to be progressive in its attitude towards international discussions on the Rio process, and to ensure that next year's Earth Summit (Rio+10) is a success. 
In addition to protecting the climate, we also have to work to protect the diversity of species and to protect the environment from pollutants that are harmful to natural life and health. 
Similarly, the planet's resources have to be protected so that they may be handed on in good condition to future generations. 
*  Creating a fairer world 
Environmental protection is an integral part of ensuring social justice. In a world of limited resources, the need for equality is the same between individuals, communities, countries and also generations. 
The present generation is consuming natural resources and undermining the planet's ability to absorb the harmful effects of our activities at the expense of the wealth and quality of life of future generations. 
A quarter of the people living in the developed world consume three quarters of natural resources, and are also responsible for most environmental damage, while it is the poor and deprived who suffer by far the most from the ill effects. According to one estimate 100,000 have been killed during the last two years from the effects of climate change, the vast majority in poorer countries. A more responsible attitude from western countries is therefore essential. 
The biggest threat to our security today is the increasingly globalised economy, which can bring the economies of small countries to their knees and cause environmental catastrophes brought about by climate change. 
Action at the global level is necessary to protect workers' rights , and we support the standards developed by the International Labour Organisation in pursuit of this. 
The poverty gap is growing ever wider and HIV/AIDS kills the same number of people in the developing world as world wars have killed in the past. 
*  Combating poverty 
We support an annual increase in overseas aid to reach the UN target of 0.7% of GDP and call fro aid to targeted on the poorest countries. A commitment to the 2015 International Development Targets must be central to international politics. We shall call a transfer of resources from military expenditure to international development. 
Similarly a consistent method of transferring technology and finance to poor countries is needed, including special taxes for the purpose. We support the introduction of a Tobin tax, an air-travel tax, with the revenue earmarked for sustainable development in poor countries. 
We recognise the link between poverty and debt reduction and call for further and more effective debt-cancellation measures in more of the poorest countries. 
Sufficient resources must be provided to write off the debts of poor countries and for adequate resources for the Global Education Programme, to ensure a basic education for every child by 2015. 
HIV/AIDS is a global emergency. Drugs and vaccines must be made available to all on the basis of need. 
We therefore support the reform of the Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement which allows companies to price drugs beyond the reach of many of the poorest countries. 
We also support the strengthening of the Biosafety Protocol which allows the poorer countries to regulate the import of GMOs. 
Sustainable development, protection of workers' rights and the creation of a more equal world should be core responsibilities for the WTO, the World Bank and the IMF and all these should be part of a reformed United Nations system. They should be democratised in order to increase the influence of poor countries, and so that they have the power to oblige international corporations to operate in a way that is compatible with the needs of the environment. 
Key Recommendations 
Full legislative powers for the National Assembly following the pattern of the Scottish parliament with provision for further devolution 
More rights and freedom for local councils 
A stronger voice for Wales in Europe, and pressure for developments which will enable this to occur 
Support for economic and monetary union in principle, with Britain joining the Euro at the appropriate exchange rate 
Reduced expenditure on arms, and more on international development 
Move towards a common foreign and external security policy for Europe 
Opposition to USA's 'son of star wars' missile scheme 
Move towards more governance at a global level, particularly in order to act on the environment, international security and combating poverty 
Top of Form
Bottom of Form

