No to war, racism and privatisation For peace and socialism
VOTE COMMUNIST
Communist Party 2005 election manifesto


THE COMMUNIST PARTY is standing candidates in this election in order to argue the case for a labour movement-based alternative to New Labour's politics of fear, deceit and war. Tony Blair and his New Labour cronies are campaigning on the basis of a Big Lie ­ that there is an imminent threat to Britain from terrorists, rogue states, criminals and floods of asylum seekers, and that this threat justifies sacrificing civil liberties at home and the lives of our service men and women abroad, let alone the countless lives of civilians in countries like Afghanistan and Iraq. Like all Big Lies, this is intended to divert attention from the real enemy ­ here the transnational corporations and banks who hold the economic levers of power and for whom profit comes first, no matter what the human cost. It is these monopolist economic interests, particularly in the oil industry, which were behind the US-led war on Iraq ­ a war which Blair supported, to Britain's ignominy and shame. He lied to the people and Parliament of Britain about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. The war has actually made the world a more dangerous

place, by recruiting many more potential terrorist opponents of US and British policies. A Prime Minister who lies to the House of Commons in order to make war is not fit to hold office. Furthermore, if Blair continues he will inevitably involve Britain in more wars. His domestic policies mean more privatisation of public services, more export of manufacturing jobs overseas, more attacks on civil liberties and asylum seekers, continuing injustice to pensioners and the surrender of our democracy to the European Union superstate. To prevent this scenario, it is vital that New Labour is defeated. But that does not mean supporting the Tories, Liberal Democrats, UKIP, the SNP or Plaid Cymru.Their overall policies are even less in the interests of working people than those of New Labour, and they are even less responsive to labour movement pressure. Even more dangerous would be a vote for the BNP or the NF. These fascist parties hide their virulent antidemocratic and anti-working class policies behind a smokescreen of racism, and we urge all voters to reject them. Finally, it does it does not mean

replacing Tony Blair by Gordon Brown or any other New Labour clone. As Chancellor of the Exchequer, Brown has bankrolled the war on Iraq and promoted privatisation of public services and means testing for pensioners. Defeating New Labour means that the labour movement itself must reclaim its party from the Blairite clique. It means uniting and mobilising around a Left Wing Programme of alternative policies against the monopolies and in the interests of working people. In this Manifesto, we put forward such a programme. It cannot however simply remain the property of the Communist Party and its suppor ters. There are many on the left who will accept its broad proposals, and will wish to add to them, rooting the programme more firmly in the working class movement.Achieving it will require building a democratic a n t i - m o n o p o ly alliance, t o exert mass pressure outside Parliament to force a change of leadership and d i re c t i o n of the Labour Government. The Communist Party works within the labour movement to bring about this result. The election of Communist MPs would enormously assist this process.


A programme for peace,jobs, services and social justice
Peace
Where does the greatest threat to peace come from today? From terrorists? From Syria, Iran, Cuba or North Korea? That's what New Labour, the Tories, George Bush and the millionaire press would have us believe. They lie. The greatest threat comes from the real ` rogue state' ­ the USA. Armed to the teeth with enough nuclear weapons to destroy the world several times over, the Bush administration is pursuing a strategy of military domination, to dictate terms to other countries in the interests of US-based transnational corporations. In order to secure control over energy sources and routes, it is aiming for `full spectrum dominance' ­ land, sea, air and outer space. This is the background to the aggression against Iraq, the stigmatising of other countries as `rogue states' and the so-called `Son of Star Wars' National Missile Defence System. The Blair government is supporting this strategy to the hilt. It is not a strategy in the interests of Britain's working people. It is vital for Britain to adopt an independent foreign policy based on peaceful coexistence and the rights of all nations to self-determination. That means ending the occupation of Iraq, withdrawing from NATO and closing all US bases on British soil, including Menwith Hill and Fylingdales which are essential to the ` S t a r Wars' programme. It means working within the United Nations to oppose the US doctrines of pre-emptive action and regime change, and to implement UN resolutions on the establishment of a Palestinian state. Solving the problem of terrorism means ending its root cause ­ the economic and military domination of the world by imperialist powers like the USA and Britain, which condemns millions of people to poverty, ill-health and powerlessness. Britain must take a lead in campaigning for new international economic relations based on fair trade, social justice and respect for national sovereignty.

Taking control of Britain's economy
Every week 3000 jobs vanish in British manufacturing and services. While £ billions are wasted on war, weapons and speculative office building, productive investment is at an all-time low. British big business exports more capital abroad than it invests at home, while vital sectors of our economy are snapped up by foreign firms. New Labour say they cannot intervene because all of this is simply an unavoidable consequence of globalisation. Communists disagree. Globalisation is not simply an inevitable economic development over which governments have no control. It is a process specifically encouraged by imperialist states like the USA and Britain in order to promote the interests of their home-based transnational corporations. Those corporations are not all-powerful, and they can be brought to heel by any government determined to act in the interests of working people rather than those of the wealthy shareholders. Britain needs a strategy to defend and rebuild manufacturing, infrastructure and services, and provide quality jobs, including:  public ownership of essential industries threatened by the transnationals  taking back control of interest rates and monetary policy from the Bank of England, and imposing limits on the export of capital  measures to compel companies to reinvest in British industry, coupled with a commitment to introduction of a 35-hour week  government support and tariff protection for strategic industries  public ownership of the major arms manufacturers, and a shift to civilian R & D and production  renationalisation of rail and bus transport, telecommunications and the privatised utilities  outlawing mass redundancies in profitable companies and the export of jobs to super-exploited markets abroad  introducing government procurement policies to re-establish the matrix of skills, R & D, plant and productive capacity necessary for a broadly based industrial economy  enforcing genuinely equal pay for women workers by compulsory pay audits  an immediate increase in the national minimum wage to £6 an hour, as a step towards 2/3 of male median earnings, with no more discrimination against young workers  devolving powers for industrial and economic intervention to the Scottish Parliament and Welsh Assembly  cuts in VAT rates to boost working people's spending power.


Public services
New Labour has increased funding to some areas of public services, but much of the extra money has gone to private companies through the Private Finance Initiative and similar ventures. The result in education, health, prisons and other services has been a reduction in quality, cuts in facilities and worse terms and conditions for the workforce.Across the public sector, New Labour's whole approach has been to place the burden on the working class. Instead of making the wealthy pay, they are planning massive cutbacks of frontline civil services jobs ­ an essential lifeline for those on benefits. In rail transport, education, health, the postal service and municipal housing, the Blair government is lining the pockets of the privateers. In the name of spurious `choice', it is promoting elitism for the few and effectively privatising our National Health Service and local education provision. For most people, the `choice' is a mirage ­ the reality is poorer services.  Within the NHS, ` foundation' hospitals and the new specialist treatment centres are operating as private entities, depriving other hospitals of skilled staff and necessary resources. PFI schemes mean fewer hospital beds and higher public bills for decades to come.  Lucrative postal services are being creamed off by privateers, resulting in cutbacks in Royal Mail, later deliveries and the closure of rural and crown post offices.  In education, elitist `city academies' and PFI have likewise been promoted. Now the government's `Building Schools for the Future' programme means that funds for school building and repair will only be provided if the local council accepts the creation of a privately-sponsored city academy, and surrenders control for school maintenance to a private consortium.  Although homelessness is at record levels, fewer than 500 council houses

The European Union
The European Union is far from progressive. It is a supra-national structure furthering the interests of big EU-based corporations whose objective is to grow even bigger and maximise their profits in competition with US, Japanese and other transnationals. That means mergers, takeovers, job losses, wholesale privatisations and attacks on public services and the welfare state. It means wages, conditions and pensions being driven down under the impact of sharper competition. That is why the draft EU constitution and the proposal for Britain to sign up to the euro must be rejected. We call for a decisive `No' vote in both referenda. Current EU treaties already bar national governments from developing socialised services or production. Power in the EU resides in the Council of Ministers and the European Central Bank, not the European Parliament which is little more than a talking shop.The Council of Ministers is much more responsive to the European Round Table of Industrialists. The draft EU Constitution specifically prescribes a `social market' economy as the model. If adopted, it would therefore enhance the power of big business at a national level. There is nothing `internationalist' about the EU. In fact it is the opposite, a vehicle for empire, imperialism and oppression, a racist `Fortress Europe' against the peoples of the Third World. The formation of an EU `rapid reaction force' is in effect an EU army to defend the interests of European corporations and to fight wars for resources. The euro has not helped the workers of France and Germany, where official unemployment is at a much higher level than in Britain, and where capital continues to be exported out of the EU. By signing up to the single currency, Britain would throw away any chance for the Westminster Parliament to exert control over the British economy, and to provide the jobs and services which our people need. Communists argue that the EU cannot be reformed from within and that Britain should withdraw, in favour of free and equal relations with all nations around the globe. This view is not yet shared by all on the left. We can and must however unite around opposition to the single European currency and the draft EU Constitution.

are being built per year. One in three council homes is in urgent need of repair but New Labour will only release funds if tenants agree to transfer to private Housing Associations or Arms Length Management Associations ­ despite the 2004 Labour Party Conference decision that local councils should have the same access to funding. ouncil house rents are being progressively increased, to the point that only those entitled to means-tested housing benefit can afford them. Communists say: this surrender to the privateers must stop. Britain needs a programme to defend our public services, including:  an end to all privatisation, PFI and Public-Private Partnership schemes  scrapping the `foundation trust' status for hospitals and restoring co-operation under democratic control, rather than competition, as the ethos of the NHS  providing all local authority schools with the current level of funding for city academies and city technology colleges, and re-establishing local democratic control over education  a comprehensive programme to increase socially affordable housing, with direct investment in council house building and repairs, an immediate end to council house sales, scrapping of housing stock transfers, and reversal of those transfers already carried through  renewal of local government based on greater planning and financial powers, the introduction of a local income tax and local control of the business rates  restoration of exclusive postal services to Royal Mail, and an end to the post office closure programme  a halt to the threatened redundancy of 100,000 civil servants.

Dignity and security for all ages
The pensions system is in crisis. The Tories broke the link between the state pension and earnings, and encouraged workers to opt out of the earningsrelated scheme in favour of company or private schemes. New Labour has continued this process. It has:  refused to reinstate the link with earnings  raised the future retirement age for women workers to 65  brought in the means-tested Pension Credit which ensures that many pensioners will still be denied a decent income in retirement  introduced so-called "stakeholder" pensions, which have had poor take-up as employers are not compelled to pay  done little to protect workers whose pensions have vanished when their


company has gone out of business condoned the closure of occupational final salary pension schemes  attacked the benefits payable under existing public sector pension schemes. By offering a spurious inducement to workers for deferring retirement beyond 65, the government has actually encouraged a work till you drop ethos and opened the door to compulsory raising of the retirement age. Meanwhile millions of workers of all ages face an uncertain retirement since they will have nothing but the basic state pension to rely on. The situation for those on benefits is little better. Despite the much vaunted claims for New Labour's `New Deal' scheme, the reality is that long-term unemployed have been threatened with the loss of even the meagre Job Seeker's Allowance. Large numbers have either simply disappeared from the register or have been forced to take low-paid jobs with poor working conditions. Many single parents remain in a poverty trap due to lack of affordable childcare, and the threat of reduced benefits on leaving employment. Now compulsion is being extended to those having to rely on Incapacity Benefit. Communists say: dignity and financial security must apply to all ages. A decent state pension, free from means testing and linked to earnings, is the most effective way of providing for retirement.We call for:  immediate restoration of the value of the state pension and an end to discrimination on grounds of gender or national insurance contributions ­ that means £114 per week for all  progressive raising of the figure to twothirds of male average earnings and then annual increases with male average earnings or the cost of living, whichever is the higher  compulsor y employer contributions for a second, state regulated, pension;  long-term nursing home care for the elderly to be provided by public services and free of charge where needed  restoration of eroded benefits for the unemployed, and greater access to benefits for carers, the long-term sick and people with disabilities.


Young people and local communities
Generations are being set against each other as young people are blamed for a climate of rowdyism and fear in urban neighbourhoods. Daily we hear in the media about robberies, sexual assaults and murders. Vandalism is widespread and drug dealing is endemic in many areas. Some places are so badly lit that women and pensioners are afraid to go out after dark. Britain's young people have been

short-changed and deceived by New Labour. The destruction of manufacturing employment, the closure of recreational areas and the rundown of whole housing estates is producing a generation without hope. Even for those in work, there is discrimination. The National Minimum Wage doesn't apply to 16-17 year olds, and for 18-20 year-olds there is a reduced training rate. As a result young people are regarded by rogue employers as a source of cheap labour, and are put on shortterm contracts so that they don't have to be kept on when they reach the age of 21. Then there's higher education. While the proportion of youngsters participating has increased substantially, this expansion has been achieved on the cheap. Higher student numbers have resulted in overcrowded lecture theatres, reduced tuition levels and exorbitant rents charged by private landlords. The millstone of debt being forced on students from loans and fees is a major disincentive to young people from many traditional working class areas. And how are students expected to study effectively when they have to do paid work ­ at low pay ­ simply in order to survive? The biggest deceit of all is sending young men and women in our armed forces to Iraq, to risk their lives for lies about weapons of mass of mass destruction and "liberating" the Iraqi people. New Labour has adopted much of the Tory agenda on crime, in particular that it can be solved by harsher sentences and anti-social behaviour orders (ASBOs). Meanwhile our prisons are bursting at the seams and have become schools of criminality for young people. Communists say: our young people and communities deserve better. What about imposing ASBOs on the big banks and privateers instead, to stop them blighting people's lives? We believe that all people ­ young and old ­ have a right to financial independence, decent jobs, security and housing.We call for:  the abolition of student tuition fees and the phased reintroduction of student grants alongside interest-free loans  all workers aged 16 or over to be entitled to the full National Minimum Wage  high-quality vocational training for young people to meet long-term employment needs, as part of a as government job creation programme  closer liaison between local councils, community groups and the police to tackle anti-social and self-destructive behaviour  affordable community recreational facilities, adequate lighting in all urban streets and parks, and funds for security measures in pensioners' homes.

Racism and fascism
Throughout the pre-election campaign, leading Tory and New Labour politicians were falling over each other to show how tough they could be on `bogus' asylum seekers, refugees and even travelling people. They have been pandering to the lies of the tabloid press ­ particularly that Britain is on the verge of being swamped by floods of so-called economic migrants, and that we cannot afford to support even those who are here. They have clearly decided to steal the clothes of the fascist BNP in order to win back votes from them. Dress it up as you like, this is nothing less than blatant racism.When the tabloid press stigmatises refugees and asylum seekers, it paints a picture of people of black, brown, yellow or simply dark skin. These newspapers conveniently ignore the thousands of white people from Europe , the USA or Commonwealth countries who face few restrictions in coming to Britain to live and work. The tabloid press also fails to point out that:  as one of the world's wealthiest countries, Britain receives just half a percent of the world's refugees and asylum seekers  immigrants contribute £2.5 billion more to the economy than they receive in wages and benefits  nearly half of all asylum seekers in Britain are from Iraq, Afghanistan and Yugoslavia ­ countries recently at the receiving end of carpet-bombing by Britain and the USA. Racism divides workers and allows the capitalist class greater opportunity to exploit them. The devaluation of black people's lives allows the ruling class the freedom to bomb Third World countries like Iraq ­ with the idea that the people there don't matter because they aren't white. The institutional racism in our society means that black and ethnic minority people have fewer opportunities in jobs, housing, health care and education. In our inner cities, racist attacks are a daily reality, fanned by fascist organisations who seize on harsh economic conditions and media portrayals of black youth. Communists believe that every person should be entitled to equal treatment, regardless of their race, culture, religion or national origin. We call for immediate measures to root out racism:  replacement of all racist asylum, immigration and nationality laws by measures which reflect our international and humanitarian commitments  making racist attacks a specific legal offence  the closure of repressive prison-like facilities for asylum seekers  an end to the dispersal policy for asylum seekers.


Civil liberties
` B e afraid. Be very afraid.' That is the message of the blatant climate of fear created by the government over the last few months. It has been used to justify the 2005 Prevention of Terrorism Act, the most oppressive piece of legislation since t h e `Six Acts' of 1819. Our society is under threat, we are told, from hundreds of would-be terrorists. Sometimes these are run together with the words `Moslem', `Islamic' or `asylum seekers', so that any people of Middle Eastern appearance are seen as ` t h e enemy within'. On the basis of such scaremongering our most basic civil liberty ­ the right not to be imprisoned by the government without trial ­ has been abolished. Coupled with this has been the decision to introduce identity cards, ultimately to be made compulsory, and the provisions of the Serious Crime and Police Bill, which allow the police much greater powers in dealing with demonstrations and protests. These measures are totally out of proportion to the scale of the problem. Nor will they work. As experience over Northern Ireland showed, inevitably the innocent are targeted, and this stokes up resentment and even support for terrorist activities. Given the lies told about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, government claims of the scale of the terrorist threat in Britain ring hollow. No significant evidence of the threat has yet been provided. But the most effective way of dealing with it would be, firstly, to switch the intelligence services away from their obsession with the left, labour and peace movements, and make them genuinely accountable to Parliament and the people. Secondly, the basis for the threat should be eliminated by ending Britain's interference in the affairs of sovereign countries abroad along with its support for the US drive to world domination. The biggest danger of the government's recent and proposed measures is that they will be used to target any dissidents in society ­ trade unionists, peace protesters and environmental campaigners in particular. Trade unionists are already hamstrung through the Thatcherera anti-union laws.The present attack on civil liberties could be used to outlaw all significant peaceful protest. The climate of fear has been assisted by a chorus of approval from radio, television and the mass circulation capitalist press. Dissenting voices like the Morning Star have been sidelined and denied the same distribution facilities as the major titles. Allegedly we have freedom of the press ­ yes, freedom to print, but not freedom for newspapers to be distributed and hence sold.

Our democracy and civil liberties are under threat.We call for:  restoration all civil liberties recently abrogated  cancellation of plans for ID cards  repeal of all Tory anti-trade union laws and implementation of the Charter for Workers' Rights  democratisation of the media through break-up of the media monopolies.

Women's rights
The gap between male and female earnings is as wide as ever. Compared to men, women experience a higher level of poverty, lower pay and pensions, worse working conditions, greater levels of violence and abuse, more limited access to employment and education and greater responsibility for raising the next generation. Part-time working for many women is now a necessity rather than a matter of choice. New Labour claims that it is `family friendly', but such phoney values disguise increased exploitation of women in the workplace. They say that they are encouraging single parents, predominantly women, into work, but these parents are often trapped in low-paid jobs, since benefits on leaving employment are much lower than before. By abolishing the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality in favour of a single Equalities Commission, the government has actually dealt a blow to genuine equal opportunities for both women and black or ethnic minority communities. Communists support the Charter for Women which has been widely adopted within the labour movement.This includes demands for:  strengthened laws against discrimination, for equal pay and to protect women from violence  a fight against institutionalised sexism  the introduction of positive action programmes in education, training and employment  protection of women's right to abortion and free contraception, and improved access to abortion within the NHS  affordable childcare accessible to all parents, supported by improved universal benefits and welfare provision  the scrapping of the Child Support Agency in favour of a return to the system of court orders for maintenance.

Global warming, due to increasing carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere from profligate use of fossil fuels, is now a reality and threatens the stability of our planet's climate. The consequences for agriculture and food supplies throughout the world will be dramatic and traumatic. Yet the Bush administration in the USA, acting on behalf of Big Oil, is refusing even the very limited measures of the Kyoto protocols. In Britain, despite many promises on cutting carbon dioxide emissions, the Blair government has caved in to the oil companies, and the air and road transpor t lobbies and is presiding over increased use of fossil fuels. Britain must take the lead internationally with a comprehensive programme of environmental protection measures, including:  integrated transport and energy conservation plans, based on democratic planning and public ownership of the railways and domestic airlines, municipal mass transport and of the major transport and energy monopolies public ownership of water companies  phasing out of existing nuclear power plants and municipal waste incinerators  greater investment in renewable energy sources and a massive shift to genuine recycling of domestic and industrial waste.

Scotland, Wales and the English regions
Communists have campaigned for the establishment of Scottish and Welsh parliaments since the 1930s, in order to enable the peoples of the two countries to express their national and cultural aspirations. Now there is the necessity for the Scottish parliament and Welsh assembly to have full legislative, financial and economic powers in order to pursue policies of full national development. In particular, those bodies need effective powers of economic intervention to tackle deep-rooted industrial and communications problems arising from the unequal pattern of development imposed on Britain by monopoly capitalism. Scottish and Welsh parliaments must have the legislative authority and the financial resources to protect key industries and to take failing enterprises into public ownership. Such powers will be doubly necessary in order to counteract the effect of monopoly market forces given free rein by central government in London and by the institutions and treaties of the European Union. The same arguments exist for a level of elected government in the regions of England, where a measure of democratc control also needs to be exerted over non-elected regional quangos. Unfortunately, New Labour's proposals did not represent a genuine transfer of

Environmental protection
In their drive for superprofits the transnational corporations have ravaged the Ear th's resources and environment. Unregulated dumping and pollution by toxic and radioactive wastes pose unacceptable long-term health hazards.


democratic power from the centre to the people in those regions. The assembly constituencies were too large and the proposed powers and resources were too limited. Indeed, the danger was that such assemblies would act mostly as conveyor belts for central government policies of privatisation and regionalisation of public sector pay and conditions, taking powers and resources from more genuinely local government in the process. The Communist Party continues to support the principle of democratic local and regional government ­ including the establishment of an elected assembly for Cornwall ­ but such bodies must have the power and resources to intervene decisively in economic and social affairs in he interests of working people.

and republicans. Allegations of criminal activity by some republicans have been used to block a return to power sharing. The current grave situation is of benefit only to those who are opposed to a settlement based on peace and equality. We therefore demand that:  the British government, working alongside its Dublin counterpart, acts as a matter of urgency to resume inclusive talks aimed at dealing with all outstanding issues barring the way to a revival of the devolved assembly at Stormont and the full implementation of the Good Friday deal.

Where will the money come from?
The programme outlined above can easily be paid for provided there is a political will. Britain is a wealthy country.The problem is that the money is in the wrong hands. Just 5 per cent ­ one twentieth ­ of our country's population own 43 per cent of the wealth (62 per cent if housing and mortgage debt are excluded) ­ while the poorer one half owns just 6 per cent (or 2 percent excluding housing). This massive inequality in wealth distribution has increased since New Labour came to office. That is why the Communist Party favours a Wealth Tax on the richest 5 per cent of the population. And if Tory chancellor Howe could levy a 5 per cent windfall tax on banking super-profits in

Northern Ireland
The Communist Party supports a united and independent Ireland and remains committed to the full implementation of the Good Friday Agreement as the best way forward for ending discrimination and of securing a lasting and peaceful settlement to the centuries-long Irish conflict. The Irish peace process has been in a state of crisis since the British government unilaterally decided to suspend the Good Friday institutions, including the devolved Stormont assembly, in October 2002. The crisis has deepened recently, primarily because of the failure of talks in 2004 on reviving the Good Friday institutions, largely caused by the Democratic Unionist Party's refusal to embrace genuine power sharing with Irish nationalists

1981, and New Labour chancellor Brown could do the same with the privatised utilities in 1998, so the time is right to tax the super-profits of British-based banks (£30 billions) and oil companies (£18 billions) today. That's why the Communist party proposes:  an immediate 20 per cent windfall tax on the super-profits of the banks and oil companies: REVENUE nearly £10 billions  a wealth tax of 1 per cent on the richest 5 per cent and stricter measures against tax evasion by the wealthy: REVENUE at least £15 billions  higher top rates of income tax on earnings above £50,000: REVENUE at least £5 billions  an increase in corporation tax on business profits, especially those made from overseas operations (£96 billions last year): REVENUE at least £10 billions  decommissioning the Trident nuclear submarine fleet and a big cut in militar y spending to the level of the European average: REVENUE about £5 billions  public ownership to be financed by the issue of government bonds. These measures would raise at least £45 billions in a single year ­ enough to build 80 stateof-the-art hospitals, 300 fully equipped new schools, 700 youth and community centres and half a million new houses and flats to meet social need.

Our aim is socialism
There is much talk about `globalisation' today. It is presented as an inevitable development, one which governments are powerless to control, and to which there is no alternative.What does it mean in reality? We live in a world of enormous contrasts of wealth and poverty. While transnational corporations like Exxonmobil, Shell, Microsoft and Nike make massive profits, millions of people throughout the Third World are condemned to a life of toil, poverty, disease and premature death. In the name of progress, economic resources are plundered, the environment despoiled, national economies destroyed, public services privatised and workers' hard-won rights sacrificed at the altar of profit. That is the reality of capitalist globalisation. It is neither inevitable nor accidental. It is a process deliberately promoted by imperialist powers like the USA, Britain and France in order to further the interests of their own transnational corporations. It is a process which leads inevitably to war, as the competition for resources and markets becomes sharper. Communists believe in a fundamentally different type of internationalism ­ one which recognises that there is one humanity, that the Earth's resources are `a common treasury for all', that world peace and nuclear disarmament are vital and that, by working together, the peoples of the world can secure a just and sustainable future. The capitalist system, based on exploitation and conflict, has no solution to the social, economic and environmental crisis facing humanity today. It must be replaced by socialism. Each country and nation will need to arrive at socialism by its own means ­ but relying on solidarity and support from progressive people throughout the world. The Communist Party is committed to building an equal, democratic and inclusive society in Britain. Our aim is socialism, in which the means of production, distribution and exchange are socially owned and utilised in a planned way for the benefit of all. Socialism creates conditions for the advance to a fully communist form of society free from exploitation and oppression, where everyone can develop their talents to the maximum. Our strategy for achieving socialism is set out in our programme, Britain's Road to Socialism.


The Communist Party of Britain
  

Under New Labour the rich have got much richer
The richest 5 per cent of the population now own £1,490 billion of Britain's non-housing wealth ­ nearly DOUBLED since 1996. The poorer one-half of the people own just £45 billion ­ about HALF the amount owned in 1996.
TOTAL PERSONAL WEALTH IN BRITAIN, 2002: £3,464 billions (= the pie) (source: Inland Revenue 22.12.04)



 

strives for the widest unity to win equality and women's liberation, defeat racism and homophobia, and protect the environment. It is based on the class and internationalist principles of Marxism-Leninism organised for socialist revolution, seeking to strengthen its roots among working women and men, as only a united working class can lead the whole of society to socialism open and democratic, drawing on the initiative and creativity of its members in planning and carrying through its activities and policies, electing its leadership and selecting its candidates centralised, so that it can intervene in political class struggle as a disciplined and united force opposed to sectarian, dogmatic and dictatorial methods.

slice owned by richest 5 per cent of population

slice owned by poorer half of population

Communist Party General Election Appeal 2005
A big Communist vote in England, Scotland and Wales will be the most effective way to build support for a broadbased Left Wing Programme as outlined in this Manifesto. Please help by giving generously. Make cheques to "CPB National Election Fund", Ruskin House, 23 Coombe Road, Croydon CR0 1BD. [NOTE: under election law, registered political parties must check that individual donors of £200 or more are registered electors, and must declare the names of such donors to the Electoral Commission]

New Labour's Economic Priorities
   



British-based High Street banks have declared latest annual profits of £30 billions (for 2003) British-based oil companies made £18 billion profit over the last year. The rate of corporation tax on British company profits is one of the lowest in the developed world. In 2003, British firms spent £32 billion on foreign direct investment ­ enough to employ one million workers. Since 1997, nearly one million manufacturing jobs have been lost in Britain

THE COMMUNIST PARTY: BUILDING FOR THE FUTURE
Published and printed by CPB, Ruskin House, 23 Coombe Rd., Croydon CR0 1BD.

Please send me ____ copies of the Election Manifesto Please send me information about the Communist Party Name Address

Read the Morning Star daily paper of the left
For news, for sport or for working-class politics, there is no alternative to the

Postcode Phone/email Send this slip to CPB, Ruskin House, 23 Coombe Rd., Croydon CR0 1BD. Phone 020 8686 1659 email office@communist-party.org.uk

Morning Star
Order from your newsagents 60p daily

www.communist-party.org.uk


